xii note on the text cause of the delay in publishing volume three, which in the end contained no index at all, only an apology from the publisher for its absence. For Tolkien had abandoned work on it after indexing volumes one and two, believing its size and therefore its cost to be ruinous. Volume three, The Return of the King, finally appeared in England on 20 October 1955 and in the United States on 5 January 1956. With the appearance of the third volume, The Lord of the Rings was published in its entirety, and its first edition text remained virtually unchanged for a decade. Tolkienhadmadeafewsmallcorrections,butfurthererrors entered The Fellowship of the Ring in its December 1954 second impression when the printer, having distributed the typeafterthefirstprinting,resetthebookwithoutinforming the authoror publisher.These includemisrepresentations of the original printed text – that is, words and phrases that read acceptably in context, but which depart from Tolkien’s wording as originally written and published. In 1965, stemming from what then appeared to be copy- right problems in the United States, an American paperback firm published an unauthorized and non-royalty-paying edi- tion of The Lord of the Rings. For this new edition by Ace Books the text of the narrative was reset, thus introducing new typographical errors; the appendices, however, were reproducedphotographicallyfromthehardcoveredition,and remain consistent with it. Tolkien set to work on his first revision of the text so that a newly revised and authorized edition could successfully compete on the American market. This first revision of the text was published in America in paperback by Ballantine Books, under licence from Houghton Mifflin, in October 1965. In addition to revisions within the text itself, Tolkien replacedhisoriginalforewordwithanewone.Hewaspleased to remove the original foreword; in his check copy, he wrote of it: ‘confusing (as it does) real personal matters with the ‘‘machinery’’ of the Tale, is a serious mistake’. Tolkien also added an extension to the prologue and an index – not
note on the text xiii the detailed index of names promised in the first edition, but, rather, a bald index with only names and page refer- ences. Additionally, at this time the appendices were greatly revised. Tolkienreceivedhiscopiesofthe Ballantineeditioninlate January 1966, and in early February he recorded in his diary that he had ‘worked for some hours on the Appendices in Ballantine version & found more errors than I at first expected’. Soon after this he sent a small number of further revisions to Ballantine for the appendices, including the now well-known addition of ‘Estella Bolger’ as wife of Meriadoc in the family trees in Appendix C. Most of these revisions, which entered variously in the third and fourth impressions (June and August 1966) of volume three, and which were not always inserted correctly (thereby causing further con- fusion in the text), somehow never made it into the main sequence of revision in the three-volume British hardcover edition, and for long remained anomalies. Tolkien once wrote, concerning the revising of The Lord of the Rings, that perhaps he had failed to keep his notes in order; this errant branch of revision seems likely to be an example of that disorder–eitherinhisnotesorintheabilityofhispublishers to follow them with utmost accuracy. The revised text first appeared in Great Britain in a three- volume hardcover ‘Second Edition’ from Allen & Unwin on 27 October 1966. But again there were problems. Although the revisions Tolkien sent to America of the text itself were availabletobeutilizedinthenew Britishedition,hisextensive revisions to the appendices werelost after being entered into the Ballantineedition.Allen&Unwinwereforcedtoresetthe appendicesusingthecopyaspublishedinthefirst Ballantine edition. This did not include Tolkien’s second, small set of revisions sent to Ballantine; but, more significantly, it did include a great number of errors and omissions, many of which were not discovered until long afterwards. Thus, in the appendices, a close scrutiny of the first edition text and ofthemuchlatercorrectedimpressionsofthesecondedition
xiv note on the text is necessary to discern whether any particular change in this edition is authorial or erroneous. In America, the revised text appeared in hardcover in the three-volume edition published by Houghton Mifflin on 27February1967.Thistextwasevidentlyphoto-offsetfrom the1966Allen&Unwinthree-volumehardcover,andisthus consistentwithit.Asidefromthefirstprintingofthissecond Houghton Mifflin edition, which has a 1967 date on the title page, none of the many reprintings is dated. After the initial printingsofthisedition,whichborea1966copyrightnotice, the date of copyright was changed in 1965 to match the statement in the Ballantine edition. This change has caused a great deal of confusion for librarians and other researchers who have tried to sort out the sequence of publication of these editions. Meanwhile, Tolkien spent much of the summer of 1966 further revising the text. In June he learned that any more revisions were too late for inclusion in the 1966 Allen & Unwin second edition, and he recorded in his diary: ‘But I am attempting to complete my work [on the revisions] – I cannot leave it while it is all in my mind. So much time has been wasted in all my work by this constant breaking of threads.’ This was the last major set of revisions Tolkien himselfmadetothetextduringhislifetime.Theywereadded to the second impression (1967) of the three-volume hard- cover Allen & Unwin second edition. The revisions them- selves mostly include corrections of nomenclature and attempts at consistency of usage throughout the three vol- umes. Some small alterations were made by Tolkien in the 1969 one-volume India paper edition. J.R.R.Tolkien died in 1973. His third son and literary executor,Christopher Tolkien,sentalargenumberoffurther correctionsofmisprints,mainlyintheappendicesandindex, to Allen & Unwin for use in their editions in 1974. Most of these corrections were typographical, and in line with his father’s expressed intent in his own check copies. Since 1974, Christopher Tolkien has sent additional cor-
note on the text xv rections, as errors have been discovered, to the British pub- lishers of The Lord of the Rings (Allen & Unwin, later Unwin Hyman, and now Harper Collins), who have tried to be con- scientious in the impossible task of maintaining a textual integrity in whichever editions of The Lord of the Rings they have published. However, every time the text has been reset for publication in a new format (e.g. the various paperback editionspublished in Englandin the1970sand 1980s),huge numbers of new misprints have crept in, though at times some of these errors have been observed and corrected in laterprintings.Still,throughouttheseyearsthethree-volume British hardcover edition has retained the highest textual integrity. In the United States, the text of the Ballantine paperback has remained unchanged for more than three decades after Tolkien added his few revisions in 1966. The text in all of the Houghton Mifflin editions remained unchanged from 1967 until 1987, when Houghton Mifflin photo-offset the then current three-volume British hardcover edition in order to update the text used in their editions. In those new reprintings a number of further corrections (overseen by Christopher Tolkien) were added, and the errant Ballantine branch of revision (including the ‘Estella Bolger’ addition) was integrated into the main branch of textual descent. This method of correction involved a cut-and-paste process with printedversionsofthetext.Beginningwiththe1987Hough- ton Mifflin edition, an earlier version of this ‘Note on the Text’ (dated October 1986) was added to The Lord of the Rings. This ‘Note’ has been reworked three times since then – the version dated April 1993 first appeared in 1994, and the version dated April 2002 came out later that year. The present ‘Note’ replaces and supersedes all previous versions. For the 1994 British edition published by Harper Collins, the text of The Lord of the Rings was entered into word- processing files. This next stage of textual evolution came abouttoallowforagreateruniformityofthetextinallfuture editions, but with it, inevitably, came new wrinkles. Some
xvi note on the text newmisreadingsenteredintothetext,whileatthesametime others were fixed. In the worst instance, one line of the ring inscription in the chapter ‘The Shadow of the Past’ of The Fellowship of the Ring was simply dropped. Unforeseeable glitches arose in other editions when the base computerized text was transferred into page-making or typesetting pro- grams – e.g., in one edition of The Fellowship of the Ring, the closingtwosentencesof‘The Councilof Elrond’simplyand inexplicablydisappeared.Suchglitcheshavebeenverymuch the exception, not the rule, and the text has otherwise main- tained a consistency and integrity throughout its com- puterized evolution. The 1994 edition also contained a number of new correc- tions(againsupervisedby Christopher Tolkien),aswellasa reconfigured index of names and page references. The 1994 textwasfirstusedin Americaneditionspublishedby Hough- ton Mifflin in 1999. A small number of further corrections were added into the 2002 three-volume edition illustrated by Alan Lee, published by Harper Collins in Great Britain and Houghton Mifflin in the United States. The textual history of The Lord of the Rings, merely in its published form, is a vast and complex web. In this brief note I have given only a glimpse of the overall sequence and structure. Further details on the revisions and corrections made over the years to the published text of The Lord of the Rings, and a fuller account of its publishing history, may be foundin J.R.R.Tolkien:ADescriptive Bibliography,by Wayne G. Hammond, with the assistance of Douglas A. Anderson (1993). For those interested in observing the gradual evolving of The Lord of the Rings from its earliest drafts to its published form, I highly recommend Christopher Tolkien’s account, whichappearswithinfivevolumesofhistwelve-volumeseries The History of Middle-earth. Volumes six through nine con- tain the major part of his study pertaining to The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the Shadow (1988); The Treason of
note on the text xvii Isengard (1989); The War of the Ring (1990); and Sauron Defeated(1992).Also,thefinalbookoftheseries,The Peoples of Middle-earth (1996), covers the evolution of the prologue and appendices to The Lord of the Rings. These volumes contain an engrossing over-the-shoulder account of the growth and writing of Tolkien’s masterpiece. Theprocessofstudying Tolkien’smanuscriptsof The Lord of the Rings involved the deciphering of versions where Tolkienwrotefirstinpencilandthenininkatopthepencilled draft. Christopher Tolkien has decribed his father’s method ofcompositionin The Returnofthe Shadow:‘Inthehandwrit- ing that he used for rapid drafts and sketches, not intended toendurelongbeforeheturnedtothemagainandgavethem a more workable form, letters are so loosely formed that a word which cannot be deduced or guessed at from the con- text or from later versions can prove perfectly opaque after longexamination;andif,asheoftendid,heusedasoftpencil muchhasnowbecomeblurredandfaint.’Thetruedifficulty ofreadingsuchdouble-draftscanbeobservedinthefrontis- piece to The War of the Ring, which reproduces in colour Tolkien’s illustration of ‘Shelob’s Lair’ from a page of Tolkien’s manuscript. Looking very closely at the hasty ink draft alongside the illustration, one can see underneath it the earlier, hastier, pencilled draft. Also in The War of the Ring, Christopher Tolkien reproduces a page from the first manu- script of the chapter ‘The Taming of Sme´agol’, and the printed text corresponding to this text is on the facing page (see pp. 90–91). One is astonished at anyone’s ability to decipher such texts. That difficulty aside, just what do these books signify to ordinary readers and to Tolkien scholars? And what is ‘the historyofthewriting’ofabook?Simply,thesevolumesshow in great detail the development of the story of The Lord of the Rings from its very earliest drafts and hasty projections through its completion. We see in the earliest materials what is very much a children’s book, a sequel to The Hobbit, and as the story grows through various ‘phases’, there is an
xviii note on the text increaseinseriousnessanddepth.Weseealternatebranches ofdevelopment,thegradualblendingandmergingofcertain characters,andtheslowemergenceofthenatureoftherings and of the motivations of other characters. Some of these various ideas are abandoned altogether, while others are reworkedintosomevariantformthatmayormaynotsurvive into the final version. One could make a whole catalogue of interesting tidbits from Christopher Tolkien’s study – such as the fact that Striderwascalled Trotteruntilaverylatestageinthewriting of thebook; that Trotterwas at onetime a hobbit,so named because he wore wooden shoes; that Tolkien at one point considered a romance between Aragorn and E´owyn; that Tolkien wrote an epilogue to the book, tying up loose ends, but it was dropped before publication (and now appears in Sauron Defeated);andsoon.Butthesedevelopmentsarebest appreciated when read within the context of Christopher Tolkien’s commentary rather than discussed separately. The most significant achievement of these volumes is that they show us how Tolkien wrote and thought. Nowhere else do we see the authorial process itself at work in such detail. Tolkien’s hastiest comments about where the story might proceed, or why it can or can’t go such and such a way – these queries to himself were written out: Tolkien is literally thinking on paper. This gives an added dimension of under- standing to Tolkien’s comment to Stanley Unwin in a 1963 letterthat,whensufferingfromtroublewithhisshoulderand right arm, ‘I found not being able to use a pen or pencil as defeatingasthelossofherbeakwouldbetoahen.’Andwe, as readers of these volumes, can share with Tolkien himself the wonder and bewilderment of new characters appearing asiffromnowhere,orofsomeothersuddenchangeordevel- opment, at the very moment of their emergence into the story. I know of no other instance in literature where we have such a ‘history of the writing’ of a book, told mostly by the author himself, with all the hesitations and false paths laid
note on the text xix out before us, sorted out, commented upon, and served up to a reader like a feast. We are shown innumerable instances in the minutest detail of the thought-process itself at work. Weseetheauthorfullyabsorbedincreationforitsownsake. And this is all the more exceptional because this is a history not only of the unfolding of a story and its text, but of the evolutionofaworld.Thereisanadditionalwealthofmaterial beyond simple narrative text. There are maps and illustra- tions. There are languages and writing systems, and the his- tories of the peoples who spoke and wrote in these systems. All of these additional materials add multiple dimensions of complexity to our appreciation of the invented world itself. Fifty years into the published life of The Lord of the Rings, it seems extraordinary to me that we have not only such a masterful work of literature but also as a companion to it an unparalleled account of its writing. Our gratitude as readers goes to both of the Tolkiens, father and son. Douglas A. Anderson May 2004
NOTE ON THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY EDITION In this edition of The Lord of the Rings, prepared for the fiftiethanniversaryofitspublication,betweenthreeandfour hundred emendations have been made following an exhaus- tive review of past editions and printings. The present text is based on the setting of the Harper Collins three-volume hardcovereditionof2002,whichinturnwasarevisionofthe Harper Collinsreseteditionof1994.As Douglas A.Anderson commentsinthepreceding‘Noteonthe Text’,eachofthose editions was itself corrected, and each also introduced new errors. At the same time, other errors survived undetected, among them some five dozen which entered as long ago as 1954, in the resetting of The Fellowship of the Ring published as its ‘second impression’. That the printer had quietly reset The Fellowship of the Ring, and that copies had been issued without proof having been read by the author, never became known to Tolkien; while his publisher, Rayner Unwin, learned of it only thirty- eightyearsafterthefact.Tolkienfoundafewoftheunautho- rized changes introduced in the second printing when (probably while preparing the second edition in 1965) he read a copy of the twelfth impression (1962), but thought theerrorsnewlymade.These,amongothers,werecorrected inthecourseofthereprinting.Thenin1992Eric Thompson, areaderwithakeeneyefortypographicdetail,noticedsmall differences between the first and second impressions of The Fellowship of the Ring and called them to the attention of the present editors. About one-sixth of the errors that entered in the second printing quickly came to light. Many more were revealedonlyrecently,when Steven M.Frisbyusedingenious optical aids to make a comparison of copies of The Lord of the Rings in greater detail than was previously accomplished.
note on the 50th anniversary edition xxi We have gladly made full use of Mr Frisby’s results, which he has generously shared and discussed. In the course of its fifty-year history The Lord of the Rings hashadmanysuchreaderswhohaverecordedchangesmade between its various appearances in print, both to document what has gone before and to aid in the achievement of an authoritative text. Errors or possible errors were reported to the author himself or to his publishers, and information on the textual history of the work circulated among Tolkien enthusiasts at least as early as 1966, when Banks Mebane published his ‘Prolegomena to a Variorum Tolkien’ in the fanzine Entmoot. Most notably in later years, Douglas A. Anderson has been in the forefront of efforts to achieve an accurate text of The Lord of the Rings (and of The Hobbit); Christina Scull has published ‘A Preliminary Study of Vari- ations in Editions of The Lord of the Rings’ in Beyond Bree (Apriland August1985);Wayne G.Hammondhascompiled extensivelistsoftextualchangesin J.R.R.Tolkien:ADescrip- tive Bibliography (1993); and David Bratman has published animportantarticle,‘ACorrigendato The Lordofthe Rings’, in the March 1994 number of The Tolkien Collector. The observationsof Dainis Bisenieks,Yuval Welis,Charles Noad, and other readers, sent to us directly or posted in public forums, have also been of service. Efforts such as these follow the example of the author of The Lord of the Rings during his lifetime. His concern for the textual accuracy and coherence of his work is evident from the many emendations he made in later printings, and from notes he made for other emendations which for one reason oranotherhavenotpreviously(orhaveonlypartly)beenput into effect. Even late in life, when such labours wearied him, his feelings were clear. On 30 October 1967 he wrote to Joy Hill at George Allen & Unwin, concerning a reader’s query he had received about points in the Appendices to The Lord of the Rings: ‘Personally I have ceased to bother about these minor‘‘discrepancies’’,sinceifthegenealogiesandcalendars etc.lackverisimilitudeitisintheirgeneralexcessiveaccuracy:
xxii note on the 50th anniversary edition as compared with real annals or genealogies! Anyway the slips were few, have now mostly been removed, and the dis- covery of what remain seems an amusing pastime! But errors in the text are another matter’ (italics ours). In fact Tolkien had not ‘ceased to bother’, and ‘slips’ were dealt with as opportunities arose. These, and the indulgence of his pub- lisher, allowed Tolkien a luxury few authors enjoy: multiple chances not only to correct his text but to improve it, and to further develop the languages, geography, and peoples of Middle-earth. Thefiftiethanniversaryof The Lordofthe Ringsseemedan idealopportunitytoconsiderthelatest(2002)textinlightof informationwehadgatheredinthecourseofdecadesofwork in Tolkien studies, with Steve Frisby’s research at hand, and with an electroniccopy of The Lord of the Rings (supplied by Harper Collins) searchable by keyword or phrase. The latter especially allowed us to develop lists of words that varied from one instance to another, and investigate variations in usage, as they stood in the copy-text and relative to earlier editions and printings. Of course Tolkien wrote The Lord of the Rings over so long a period of time, some eighteen years, that inconsistencies in its text were almost inevitable. Chris- topher Tolkien even observed to us that some apparent inconsistencies of form in his father’s work may even have been deliberate: for instance, although Tolkien carefully dis- tinguished house ‘dwelling’ from House ‘noble family or dyn- asty’, in two instances he used house in the latter sense but in lower case, perhaps because a capital letter would have detracted from the importance of the adjective with which the word was paired (‘royal house’, ‘golden house’). There canbenodoubt,however,that Tolkienattemptedtocorrect inconsistency, no less than outright error, whenever it came to his attention, and it was our opinion, with the advice and agreementof Christopher Tolkien,thatanattemptshouldbe madetodosointheanniversaryedition,insofaraswecould carefully and conservatively distinguish what to emend. Many of the emendations in the present text are to marks
note on the 50th anniversary edition xxiii of punctuation, either to correct recent typographical errors or to repair surviving alterations introduced in the second printing of The Fellowship of the Ring. In the latter respect and in every case, Tolkien’s original punctuation is always more felicitous – subtle points, when one is comparing com- mas and semi-colons, but no less a part of the author’s intended expression. Distinctive words such as chill rather thancold,andglisteredratherthanglistened,changedbytype- setters long ago without authorization, likewise have been restored. A controlled amount of regularization also seemed called for, such as naught rather than nought, a change insti- tuted by Tolkien but not carried through in all instances; Dark Power rather than dark power when the reference is obviouslyto Sauron(or Morgoth);Barrow-downsby Tolkien’s preference rather than Barrowdowns; likewise Bree-hill rather than Bree Hill; accented and more common Dru´adan rather than Druadan; capitalized names of seasons when used as personificationormetaphor,accordingto Tolkien’spredomi- nant practice and the internal logic of the text; and Elvish ratherthanelvishwhenusedasaseparateadjective,following apreference Tolkienmarkedinhiscopyofthesecondedition of The Lordofthe Rings.Inaddition,wehaveaddedasecond accent to Nu´meno´rean(s), as Tolkien often wrote the name in manuscript and as it appears in The Silmarillion and other posthumous publications. The result, nonetheless, still includes many variations in capitalization, punctuation, and other points of style. Not all oftheseareerroneous:theyincludewordssuchas Sun,Moon, Hobbit, and Man (or sun, moon, hobbit, man), which may changeformaccordingtomeaningorapplication,inrelation to adjacent adjectives, or whether Tolkien intended personi- fication, poetry, or emphasis. His intent cannot be divined with confidence in every case. But it is possible to discern Tolkien’spreferences inmany instances,from statementshe wrote in his check copies of The Lord of the Rings or from a closeanalysisofitstextinmanuscript,typescript,proof,and print. Whenever there has been any doubt whatsoever as to
xxiv note on the 50th anniversary edition the author’s intentions, the text has been allowed to stand. Most of the demonstrable errors noted by Christopher Tolkien in The History of Middle-earth also have been cor- rected, such as the distance from the Brandywine Bridge to the Ferry (ten miles rather than twenty) and the number of Merry’s ponies (five rather than six), shadows of earlier drafts. But those inconsistencies of content, such as Gimli’s famous (and erroneous) statement in Book III, Chapter 7, ‘Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria’, which would require rewriting to emend rather than simple correction, remain unchanged. So many new emendations to The Lord of the Rings, and suchanextensivereviewofitstext,deservetobefullydocu- mented. Although most readers will be content with the text alone, many will want to know more about the problems encounteredinpreparingthisnewedition,andtheirsolutions (where solutions have been possible), especially where the text has been emended, but also where it has not. To this end, and to illuminate the work in other respects, we are preparing a volume of annotations to The Lord of the Rings for publication in 2005. This will allow us to discuss, at a length impossible in a prefatory note, the various textual cruces of The Lord of the Rings, to identify changes that have been made to the present text, and to remark on significant alterations to the published work throughout its history. We will also explain archaic or unusual words and names in The Lord of the Rings, explore literary and historical influences, noteconnectionswith Tolkien’sotherwritings,andcomment on differences between its drafts and published form, on questions of language, and on much else that we hope will interest readers and enhance their enjoyment of Tolkien’s masterpiece. Wayne G. Hammond & Christina Scull May 2004
FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION This tale grew in the telling, until it became a history of the Great War of the Ring and included many glimpses of the yet more ancient history that preceded it. It was begun soon after The Hobbit was written and before its publication in 1937; but I did not go on with this sequel, for I wished first to complete and set in order the mythology and legends of the Elder Days, which had then been taking shape for some years. I desired to do this for my own satisfaction, and I had littlehopethatotherpeoplewouldbeinterestedinthiswork, especially since it was primarily linguistic in inspiration and was begun in order to provide the necessary background of ‘history’ for Elvish tongues. When those whose advice and opinion I sought corrected little hope to no hope, I went back to the sequel, encouraged by requests from readers for more information concerning hobbits and their adventures. But the story was drawn irre- sistibly towards the older world, and became an account, as it were, of its end and passing away before its beginning and middle had been told. The process had begun in the writing of The Hobbit, in which there were already some references to the older matter: Elrond, Gondolin, the High-elves, and the orcs, as well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden of things higher or deeper or darker than its surface: Durin, Moria, Gandalf, the Necromancer, the Ring. The discovery of the significance of these glimpses and of their relation to the ancient histories revealed the Third Age and its culmi- nation in the War of the Ring. Those who had asked for more information about hobbits eventually got it, but they had to wait a long time; for the composition of The Lord of the Rings went on at intervals duringtheyears1936to1949,aperiodinwhich Ihadmany duties that I did not neglect, and many other interests as a learner and teacher that often absorbed me. The delay was,
xxvi foreword to the second edition of course, also increased by the outbreak of war in 1939, by theendofwhichyearthetalehadnotyetreachedtheendof Book One. In spite of the darkness of the next five years I found that the story could not now be wholly abandoned, and Iploddedon,mostlybynight,till Istoodby Balin’stomb in Moria. There I halted for a long while. It was almost a yearlaterwhen I wentonandsocameto Lothlo´rienandthe Great River late in 1941. In the next year I wrote the first drafts of the matter that now stands as Book Three, and the beginnings of chapters I and III of Book Five; and there as thebeaconsflaredin Ano´rienand The´odencameto Harrow- dale I stopped. Foresight had failed and there was no time for thought. Itwasduring1944that,leavingthelooseendsandperplex- ities of a war which it was my task to conduct, or at least to report, I forced myself to tackle the journey of Frodo to Mordor. These chapters, eventually to become Book Four, were written and sent out as a serial to my son, Christopher, then in South Africa with the RAF. Nonetheless it took another five years before the tale was brought to its present end; in that time I changed my house, my chair, and my college,andthedaysthoughlessdarkwerenolesslaborious. Thenwhenthe‘end’hadatlastbeenreachedthewholestory had to be revised, and indeed largely re-written backwards. And it had to be typed, and re-typed: by me; the cost of professional typing by the ten-fingered was beyond my means. The Lord of the Rings has been read by many people since itfinallyappearedinprint;and Ishouldliketosaysomething here with reference to the many opinions or guesses that I havereceivedorhavereadconcerningthemotivesandmean- ingofthetale.Theprimemotivewasthedesireofatale-teller to try his hand at a really long story that would hold the attention of readers, amuse them, delight them, and at times maybe excite them or deeply move them. As a guide I had only my own feelings for what is appealing or moving, and for many the guide was inevitably often at fault. Some who
foreword to the second edition xxvii have read the book, or at any rate have reviewed it, have founditboring,absurd,orcontemptible;and Ihavenocause to complain, since I have similar opinions of their works, or of the kinds of writing that they evidently prefer. But even from the points of view of many who have enjoyed my story there is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possible inalongtaletopleaseeverybodyatallpoints,nortodisplease everybody at the same points; for I find from the letters that Ihavereceivedthatthepassagesorchaptersthataretosome a blemish are all by others specially approved. The most critical reader of all, myself, now finds many defects, minor and major, but being fortunately under no obligation either toreviewthebookortowriteitagain,hewillpassoverthese insilence,exceptonethathasbeennotedbyothers:thebook is too short. As for any inner meaning or ‘message’, it has in the inten- tion of the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. Asthestorygrewitputdownroots(intothepast)andthrew out unexpected branches: but its main theme was settled from the outset by the inevitable choice of the Ring as the link between it and The Hobbit. The crucial chapter, ‘The Shadow of the Past’, is one of the oldest parts of the tale. It was written long before the foreshadow of 1939 had yet become a threat of inevitable disaster, and from that point the story would have developed along essentially the same lines, if that disaster had been averted. Its sources are things long before in mind, or in some cases already written, and little or nothing in it was modified by the war that began in 1939 or its sequels. The real war does not resemble the legendary war in its process or its conclusion. If it had inspired or directed the development of the legend, then certainly the Ring would havebeenseizedandusedagainst Sauron;hewouldnothave beenannihilatedbutenslaved,and Barad-duˆrwouldnothave been destroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get pos- session of the Ring, would in the confusion and treacheries of the time have found in Mordor the missing links in his
xxviii foreword to the second edition own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would have made a Great Ring of his own with which to challenge the self-styled Ruler of Middle-earth. In that conflict both sides would have held hobbits in hatred and contempt: they would not long have survived even as slaves. Other arrangements could be devised according to the tastesorviewsofthosewholikeallegoryortopicalreference. But I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence. I much prefer history, true or feigned, with its varied applicability to the thought and experience of readers. I think that many confuse ‘applicability’ with ‘alle- gory’; but the one resides in the freedom of the reader, and the other in the purposed domination of the author. An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by his experience, but the ways in which a story-germ uses the soil of experience are extremely complex, and attempts to define the process are at best guesses from evidence that is inadequate and ambiguous. It is also false, though naturally attractive, when the lives of an author and critic have over- lapped, to suppose that the movements of thought or the events of times common to both were necessarily the most powerful influences. One has indeed personally to come under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but as theyearsgobyitseemsnowoftenforgottenthattobecaught in youth by 1914 was no less hideous an experience than to be involved in 1939 and the following years. By 1918 all but one of my close friends were dead. Or totake a less grievous matter: it has been supposed by some that ‘The Scouring of the Shire’ reflects the situation in England at the time when I was finishing my tale. It does not. It is an essential part of theplot,foreseenfromtheoutset,thoughintheeventmodi- fied by the character of Saruman as developed in the story without, need I say, any allegorical significance or contem- porary political reference whatsoever. It has indeed some basis in experience, though slender (for the economic situ- ation was entirely different), and much further back. The
foreword to the second edition xxix country in which I lived in childhood was being shabbily destroyed before I was ten, in days when motor-cars were rareobjects(Ihadneverseenone)andmenwerestillbuilding suburbanrailways.Recently Isawinapaperapictureofthe lastdecrepitudeoftheoncethrivingcorn-millbesideitspool that long ago seemed to me so important. I never liked the looks of the Young miller, but his father, the Old miller, had a black beard, and he was not named Sandyman. The Lord of the Rings is now issued in a new edition, and the opportunity has been taken of revising it. A number of errors and inconsistencies that still remained in the text have been corrected, and an attempt has been made to provide information on a few points which attentive readers have raised. I have considered all their comments and enquiries, and if some seem to have been passed over that may be because I have failed to keep my notes in order; but many enquiries could only be answered by additional appendices, orindeedbytheproductionofanaccessoryvolumecontain- ingmuchofthematerialthat Ididnotincludeintheoriginal edition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. In the meantime this edition offers this Foreword, an addition to the Prologue, some notes, and an index of the names of persons and places. This index is in intention complete in items but not in references, since for the present purpose it has been necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, making full use of the material prepared for me by Mrs. N. Smith, belongs rather to the accessory volume.
.
PROLOGUE 1 Concerning Hobbits This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its pages a reader may discover much of their character and a little of their history. Further information will also be found in the selection from the Red Book of Westmarch that has already been published, under the title of The Hobbit. That story was derived from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become famous in the world at large, and called by him There and Back Again, since they told of his journey into the East and his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits in the great events of that Age that are here related. Many, however, may wish to know more about this re- markablepeoplefromtheoutset,whilesomemaynotpossess the earlier book. For such readers a few notes on the more important points are here collected from Hobbit-lore, and the first adventure is briefly recalled. Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more numerous formerly than they are today; for they love peace and quiet and good tilled earth: a well-ordered and well- farmed countryside was their favourite haunt. They do not and did not understand or like machines more complicated than a forge-bellows, a water-mill, or a hand-loom, though they were skilful with tools. Even in ancient days they were, as a rule, shy of ‘the Big Folk’, as they call us, and now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to find. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though theyareinclinedtobefatanddonothurryunnecessarily,they are nonetheless nimble and deft in their movements. They
2 prologue possessed from the first the art of disappearing swiftly and silently,whenlargefolkwhomtheydonotwishtomeetcome blunderingby;andthisarttheyhavedevelopeduntilto Men itmayseemmagical.But Hobbitshavenever,infact,studied magic of any kind, and their elusiveness is due solely to a professional skill that heredity and practice, and a close friendshipwiththeearth,haverenderedinimitablebybigger and clumsier races. Fortheyarealittlepeople,smallerthan Dwarves:lessstout and stocky, that is, even when they are not actually much shorter. Their height is variable, ranging between two and four feet of our measure. They seldom now reach three feet; but they have dwindled, they say, and in ancient days they were taller. According to the Red Book, Bandobras Took (Bullroarer), son of Isumbras the Third, was four foot five and able to ride a horse. He was surpassed in all Hobbit recordsonlybytwofamouscharactersofold;butthatcurious matter is dealt with in this book. As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are concerned, in the days of their peace and prosperity they were a merry folk. They dressed in bright colours, being notably fond of yellow and green; but they seldom wore shoes,sincetheir feethadtoughleathery solesandwereclad inathickcurlinghair,muchlikethehairoftheirheads,which was commonly brown. Thus, the only craft little practised among them was shoe-making; but they had long and skilful fingersandcouldmakemanyotherusefulandcomelythings. Their faces were as a rule good-natured rather than beau- tiful, broad, bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to laughter,andtoeatinganddrinking.Andlaughtheydid,and eat, and drink, often and heartily, being fond of simple jests at all times, and of six meals a day (when they could get them).Theywerehospitableanddelightedinparties,andin presents, which they gave away freely and eagerly accepted. Itisplainindeedthatinspiteoflaterestrangement Hobbits arerelativesofours:farnearertousthan Elves,oreventhan Dwarves.Ofoldtheyspokethelanguagesof Men,aftertheir
prologue 3 own fashion, and liked and disliked much the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship is can no longer be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in the Elder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves still preserve any records of that vanished time, and their traditions are concerned almost entirely with their own his- tory,inwhich Menappearseldomand Hobbitsarenotmen- tioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in fact, lived quietlyin Middle-earthformanylongyearsbeforeotherfolk became even aware of them. And the world being after all full of strange creatures beyond count, these little people seemed of very little importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly became, by no wish of their own, both important and renowned, and troubled the counsels of the Wise and the Great. Those days, the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long past, and the shape of all lands has been changed; but the regionsin which Hobbits thenlived weredoubtlessthe same as thosein whichthey stilllinger: the North-West ofthe Old World, east of the Sea. Of their original home the Hobbits in Bilbo’s time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning (other than genealogical lore) was far from general among them,butthereremainedstillafewintheolderfamilieswho studied their own books, and even gathered reports of old timesanddistantlandsfrom Elves,Dwarves,and Men.Their ownrecordsbeganonlyafterthesettlementofthe Shire,and their most ancient legends hardly looked further back than their Wandering Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of their peculiar words and customs,thatlikemanyotherfolk Hobbitshadinthedistant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between theeavesof Greenwoodthe Greatandthe Misty Mountains. Why they later undertook the hard and perilous crossing of the mountains into Eriador is no longer certain. Their own accountsspeakofthemultiplyingof Menintheland,andof
4 prologue a shadow that fell on the forest, so that it became darkened and its new name was Mirkwood. Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had alreadybecomedividedintothreesomewhatdifferentbreeds: Harfoots,Stoors,and Fallohides.The Harfootswerebrowner of skin, smaller, and shorter, and they were beardless and bootless;theirhandsandfeetwereneatandnimble;andthey preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, heavier in build; their feet and hands were larger; and they preferredflatlandsandriversides.The Fallohideswerefairer of skin and also of hair, and they were taller and slimmer than the others; they were lovers of trees and of woodlands. The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient times, and long lived in the foothills of the mountains. They moved westward early, and roamed over Eriador as far as Weathertop while the others were still in Wilderland. They were the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit, and far the most numerous. They were the most inclined to settleinoneplace,andlongestpreservedtheirancestralhabit of living in tunnels and holes. The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River Anduin,andwerelessshyof Men.Theycamewestafterthe Harfoots and followed the course of the Loudwater south- wards;andtheremanyofthemlongdweltbetween Tharbad and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again. The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They were more friendly with Elves than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill in language and song than in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to tilling. They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came downthe River Hoarwell.In Eriadortheysoonmingledwith theotherkindsthathadprecededthem,butbeingsomewhat bolder and more adventurous, they were often found as leadersorchieftainsamongclansof Harfootsor Stoors.Even in Bilbo’s time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland.
prologue 5 Inthewestlandsof Eriador,betweenthe Misty Mountains andthe Mountainsof Lune,the Hobbitsfoundboth Menand Elves.Indeed,aremnantstilldweltthereofthe Du´nedain,the kingsof Menthatcameoverthe Seaoutof Westernesse;but they were dwindling fast and the lands of their North King- dom were falling far and wide into waste. There was room and to spare for incomers, and ere long the Hobbits began to settle in ordered communities. Most of their earlier settle- ments had long disappeared and been forgotten in Bilbo’s time; but one of the first to become important still endured, thoughreducedinsize;thiswasat Breeandinthe Chetwood that lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire. It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits learned their letters and began to write after the manner of the Du´nedain, who had in their turn long before learned the art from the Elves. And in those days also they forgot what- everlanguagestheyhadusedbefore,andspokeeverafterthe Common Speech, the Westron as it was named, that was current through all the lands of the kings from Arnor to Gondor, and about all the coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to Lune.Yettheykeptafewwordsoftheirown,aswellastheir ownnamesofmonthsanddays,andagreatstoreofpersonal names out of the past. About this time legend among the Hobbits first becomes historywith areckoningofyears. Foritwasin theonethou- sand six hundred and first year of the Third Age that the Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set out from Bree; and having obtained permission from the high king at Fornost,* they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a great following of Hobbits. They passed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been built in the days of the power of the North Kingdom, and they took all the land beyond to dwell in, between the river and the Far Downs. All that was * Astherecordsof Gondor relatethiswas Argeleb II,thetwentieth ofthe Northernline,whichcametoanendwith Arveduithreehundred yearslater.
6 prologue demanded of them was that they should keep the Great Bridge in repair, and all other bridges and roads, speed the king’s messengers, and acknowledge his lordship. Thusbeganthe Shire-reckoning,fortheyearofthecrossing ofthe Brandywine(asthe Hobbitsturnedthename)became Year Oneofthe Shire,andalllaterdateswerereckonedfrom it.* At once the western Hobbits fell in love with their new land, and they remained there, and soon passed once more out of the history of Men and of Elves. While there was still a king they were in name his subjects, but they were, in fact, ruled by their own chieftains and meddled not at all with eventsintheworldoutside.Tothelastbattleat Fornostwith the Witch-lordof Angmartheysentsomebowmentotheaid of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record it. But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and then the Hobbits took the landfor their own,and they chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the authority of the king that was gone. There for a thousand years they were little troubled by wars, and they prospered and multiplied afterthe Dark Plague(S.R.37)untilthedisasterofthe Long Winterandthefaminethatfollowedit.Manythousandsthen perished,butthe Daysof Dearth(1158–60)wereatthetime of this tale long past and the Hobbits had again become accustomed to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, and thoughithadlongbeendesertedwhentheyenteredit,ithad beforebeenwelltilled,andtherethekinghadoncehadmany farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods. Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge, and fifty from the northern moors to the marshes in the south. The Hobbits named it the Shire, as the region of the authority of their Thain, and a district ofwell-orderedbusiness;andthereinthatpleasantcornerof theworldtheypliedtheirwell-orderedbusinessofliving,and * Thus,theyearsofthe Third Ageinthereckoningofthe Elvesand the Du´nedain may be found by adding 1600 to the dates of Shire- reckoning.
prologue 7 theyheededlessandlesstheworldoutsidewheredarkthings moved, until they came to think that peace and plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all sensible folk. They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of the Guardians,andofthelaboursofthosethatmadepossible thelongpeaceofthe Shire.Theywere,infact,sheltered,but they had ceased to remember it. Atnotimehad Hobbitsofanykindbeenwarlike,andthey hadneverfoughtamongthemselves.Inoldendaystheyhad, of course, been often obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo’s time that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and indeed the only one that had ever been fought within the borders of the Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had grown milder, and the wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in bitter white winters were now only a grandfather’s tale. So, though there was still some store of weapons in the Shire, thesewereusedmostlyastrophies,hangingabovehearthsor on walls, or gathered into the museum at Michel Delving. The Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbits hadnoimmediateusefor,butwereunwillingtothrowaway, they called a mathom. Their dwellings were apt to become rathercrowdedwithmathoms,andmanyofthepresentsthat passed from hand to hand were of that sort. Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curi- ously tough. They were, if it came to it, difficult to daunt or tokill;andtheywere,perhaps,sounwearyinglyfondofgood thingsnotleastbecausetheycould,whenputtoit,dowithout them, and could survive rough handling by grief, foe, or weather in a way that astonished those who did not know them well and looked no further than their bellies and their well-fed faces. Though slow to quarrel, and for sport killing nothing that lived, they were doughty at bay, and at need couldstillhandlearms.Theyshotwellwiththebow,forthey werekeen-eyedandsureatthemark.Notonlywithbowsand
8 prologue arrows. If any Hobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get quicklyundercover,asalltrespassingbeastsknewverywell. All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or so they believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at home; but in the course of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of abode. Actually in the Shire in Bilbo’s daysitwas,asarule,onlytherichestandthepoorest Hobbits that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on living in burrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed, with only one window or none; while the well-to-do still constructed more luxurious versions of the simple diggings ofold.Butsuitablesitesfortheselargeandramifyingtunnels (or smials as they called them) were not everywhere to be found;andintheflatsandthelow-lyingdistrictsthe Hobbits, astheymultiplied,begantobuildaboveground.Indeed,even in the hilly regions and the older villages, such as Hobbiton or Tuckborough,orinthechieftownshipofthe Shire,Michel Delving on the White Downs, there were now many houses of wood, brick, or stone. These were specially favoured by millers, smiths, ropers, and cartwrights, and others of that sort; for even when they had holes to live in, Hobbits had long been accustomed to build sheds and workshops. The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun among the inhabitants of the Marish down by the Brandywine. The Hobbits of that quarter, the East- farthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore dwarf-bootsinmuddyweather.Buttheywerewellknownto be Stoors in a large part of their blood, as indeed was shown by the down that many grew on their chins. No Harfoot or Fallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the folk of the Marish,andof Buckland,eastofthe River,whichtheyafter- wards occupied, came for the most part later into the Shire upfromsouth-away;andtheystillhadmanypeculiarnames and strange words not found elsewhere in the Shire. Itisprobablethatthecraftofbuilding,asmanyothercrafts beside,wasderivedfromthe Du´nedain.Butthe Hobbitsmay have learned it direct from the Elves, the teachers of Men in
prologue 9 their youth. For the Elves of the High Kindred had not yet forsaken Middle-earth,andtheydweltstillatthattimeatthe Grey Havens away to the west, and in other places within reachofthe Shire.Three Elf-towersofimmemorialagewere still to be seen on the Tower Hills beyond the western marches. They shone far off in the moonlight. The tallest wasfurthestaway,standingaloneuponagreenmound.The Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the top of that tower; but no Hobbit had ever been known to climb it. Indeed, few Hobbits had ever seen or sailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had ever returned to report it. Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small boats with deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim. And as the days of the Shire lengthened they spoke less and less with the Elves, and grew afraid of them, and distrustful of those that had dealings with them; and the Sea became a word of fear among them, and a token of death, and they turned their faces away from the hills in the west. The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the Hobbits used it in their own fashion. They did not go in for towers. Their houses were usually long, low, and comfortable. The oldest kind were, indeed, no more than builtimitationsofsmials,thatchedwithdrygrassorstraw,or roofedwith turves,and havingwallssomewhat bulged.That stage, however, belonged to the early days of the Shire, and hobbit-building had long since been altered, improved by devices,learnedfrom Dwarves,ordiscoveredbythemselves. Apreferenceforroundwindows,andevenrounddoors,was the chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit-architecture. Thehousesandtheholesof Shire-hobbitswereoftenlarge, and inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins wereasbachelorsveryexceptional,astheywerealsoinmany other ways, such as their friendship with the Elves.) Some- times, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or the Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relatives lived in (comparative) peace together in one ancestral and many-tunnelled mansion. All Hobbits were, in any case,
10 prologue clannish and reckoned up their relationships with great care. Theydrewlongandelaboratefamily-treeswithinnumerable branches.Indealingwith Hobbitsitisimportanttoremember who is related to whom, and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out a family-tree that included even the more important members of the more important familiesatthetimewhichthesetalestellof.Thegenealogical trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small book in themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them exceedinglydull.Hobbitsdelightedinsuchthings,iftheywere accurate: they liked to have books filled with things that they alreadyknew,setoutfairandsquarewithnocontradictions. 2 Concerning Pipe-weed There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that must be mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed or inhaled, through pipes of clay or wood, the smoke of the burning leaves of a herb, which they called pipe-weed or leaf, a variety probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or ‘art’ as the Hobbitspreferredtocallit.Allthatcouldbediscoveredabout it in antiquity was put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later Master of Buckland), and since he and the tobacco of the Southfarthing play a part in the history that follows, his remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may be quoted. ‘This,’ he says, ‘is the one art that we can certainly claim tobeourowninvention.When Hobbitsfirstbegantosmoke is not known, all the legends and family histories take it for granted;foragesfolkinthe Shiresmokedvariousherbs,some fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that Tobold Hornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing first grew thetruepipe-weedinhisgardensinthedaysof Isengrimthe Second, about the year 1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best
prologue 11 home-grown still comes from that district, especially the varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and Southern Star. ‘How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day he would not tell. He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never went further from the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned ofthisplantin Bree,wherenow,atanyrate,itgrowswellon the south slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have been the first actual smokers of the pipe-weed. They claim, of course, to have done everything before the people of the Shire,whomtheyrefertoas‘‘colonists’’;butinthiscasetheir claim is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was from Bree that the art of smoking the genuine weed spread in the recent centuries among Dwarves and such other folk, Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers, as still passed to and fro through that ancient road-meeting. The home and centre of theartisthustobefoundintheoldinnof Bree,The Prancing Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from time beyond record. ‘All the same, observations that I have made on my own many journeys south have convinced me that the weed itself is not native to our parts of the world, but came northward from the lower Anduin, whither it was, I suspect, originally broughtover Seabythe Menof Westernesse.Itgrowsabund- antly in Gondor, and there is richer and larger than in the North, where it is never found wild, and flourishes only in warmshelteredplaceslike Longbottom.The Menof Gondor callitsweetgalenas,andesteemitonlyforthefragranceofits flowers. From that land it must have been carried up the Greenway during the long centuries between the coming of Elendilandourowndays.Buteventhe Du´nedainof Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits first put it into pipes. Not even the Wizards first thought of that before we did. Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago, and became as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.’
12 prologue 3 Of the Ordering of the Shire The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings already referred to, North, South, East, and West; and these again each into a number of folklands, which still bore the names of some of the old leading families, although by the time of this history these names were no longer found only in their proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks still lived in the Tookland,butthatwasnottrueofmanyotherfamilies,such as the Bagginses or the Boffins. Outside the Farthings were the East and West Marches: the Buckland (p. 129); and the Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1452. The Shire at this time had hardly any ‘government’. Familiesforthemostpartmanagedtheirownaffairs.Grow- ing food and eating it occupied most of their time. In other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not greedy, but contented and moderate, so that estates, farms, work- shops, and small trades tended to remain unchanged for generations. There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concern- ing the high king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, awaynorthofthe Shire.Buttherehadbeennokingfornearly athousandyears,andeventheruinsof Kings’Norburywere coveredwithgrass.Yetthe Hobbitsstillsaidofwildfolkand wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the king. For they attributed to the king of old all their essential laws;andusuallytheykeptthelawsoffreewill,becausethey were The Rules (as they said), both ancient and just. It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent; for the office of Thain had passed to them (from the Old- bucks) some centuries before, and the chief Took had borne that title ever since. The Thain was the master of the Shire- moot, and captain of the Shire-muster and the Hobbitry-in- arms; but as muster and moot were only held in times of emergency, which no longer occurred, the Thainship had ceased to be more than a nominal dignity. The Took family
prologue 13 was still, indeed, accorded a special respect, for it remained both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and was liable to produce in every generation strong characters of peculiar habits and even adventurous temperament. The latter quali- ties, however, were now rather tolerated (in the rich) than generally approved. The custom endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the family as The Took, and of adding to his name, if required, a number: such as Isengrim the Second, for instance. Theonlyrealofficialinthe Shireatthisdatewasthe Mayor of Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was elected every sevenyearsatthe Free Faironthe White Downsatthe Lithe, that is at Midsummer. As mayor almost his only duty was to preside at banquets, given on the Shire-holidays, which occurred at frequent intervals. But the offices of Postmaster and First Shirriff were attached to the mayoralty, so that he managed both the Messenger Service and the Watch. These were the only Shire-services, and the Messengers were the most numerous, and much the busier of the two. By no means all Hobbits were lettered, but those who were wrote constantly to all their friends (and a selection of their relations) who lived further off than an afternoon’s walk. The Shirriffs was the name that the Hobbits gave to their police, or the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course, no uniforms (such things being quite un- known),onlyafeatherintheircaps;andtheywereinpractice rather haywards than policemen, more concerned with the strayingsofbeaststhanofpeople.Therewereinallthe Shire onlytwelveofthem,threeineach Farthing,for Inside Work. Arather largerbody, varyingatneed, wasemployedto ‘beat the bounds’, and to see that Outsiders of any kind, great or small, did not make themselves a nuisance. At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they were called, had been greatly increased. There were many reports and complaints of strange persons and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the first sign that all wasnot quite asit should be,and always hadbeen except
14 prologue in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and noteven Bilboyethadanynotionofwhatitportended.Sixty years had passed since he set out on his memorable journey, and he was old even for Hobbits, who reached a hundred as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the considerablewealththathehadbroughtback.Howmuchor howlittleherevealedtonoone,notevento Frodohisfavour- ite ‘nephew’. And he still kept secret the ring that he had found. 4 Of the Finding of the Ring Asistoldin The Hobbit,therecameonedayto Bilbo’sdoorthe great Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him:noneother,indeed,than Thorin Oakenshield,descend- antof kings, and his twelve companions in exile. With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning of April,itbeingthentheyear1341Shire-reckoning,onaquest of great treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in the East. The questwassuccessful,andthe Dragonthatguardedthehoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of renown were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned more than a note in thelongannalsofthe Third Age,butforan‘accident’bythe way. The party was assailed by Orcs in a high pass of the Misty Mountainsastheywenttowards Wilderland;andsoit happened that Bilbo was lost for a while in the black orc- mines deep under the mountains, and there, as he groped in vaininthe dark,heputhis handonaring,lying onthefloor of a tunnel. He put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck. Trying to find his way out, Bilbo went on down to the roots of the mountains, until he could go no further. At the
prologue 15 bottom of the tunnel lay a cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the water lived Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his large flat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catching blind fish with his long fingers, and eating them raw. He ate any living thing, even orc, if he could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in the light: a ring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the one thing he loved, his ‘Precious’, and he talked to it, even when it was not with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on hisisland,exceptwhenhewashuntingorspyingontheorcs of the mines. Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been on him when they met; but it was not, and the hobbit held in his hand an Elvish knife, which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo to the Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo could not guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then he would do as Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels. Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor back, Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another many riddles. In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for he was stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his hand came upon the ring he had picked up and forgotten: What have I got in my pocket? This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses. The Authorities, itis true,differ whetherthislast question wasamere‘question’andnota‘riddle’accordingtothestrict rules of the Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer, Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; for the thought came to him that this slimy creature might prove false, even though such promises were held sacred, and of old all but the wickedest things feared to break them. But
16 prologue after ages alone in the dark Gollum’s heart was black, and treachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to his island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, not far off in the dark water. There, he thought, lay his ring. He was hungry now, and angry, and once his ‘Precious’ was with him he would not fear any weapon at all. But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was gone.Hisscreechsentashiverdown Bilbo’sback,thoughhe didnotyetunderstandwhathadhappened.But Gollumhad at last leaped to a guess, too late. What has it got in its pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his ‘Precious’.Justintime Bilbosawhisperil,andhefledblindly up the passage away from the water; and once more he was savedbyhisluck.Forasheranheputhishandinhispocket, and the ring slipped quietly on to his finger. So it was that Gollum passed him without seeing him, and went to guard the way out, lest the ‘thief’ should escape. Warily Bilbo fol- lowed him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about his ‘Precious’; from which talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth, and hope came to him in the darkness: he himselfhadfoundthemarvellousringandachanceofescape from the orcs and from Gollum. At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to the lower gates of the mines, on the eastward side of the mountains. There Gollum crouched at bay, smelling and listening; and Bilbo was tempted to slay him with his sword. But pity stayed him, and though he kept the ring, in which his only hope lay, he would not use it to help him kill thewretchedcreatureatadisadvantage.Intheend,gathering his courage, he leaped over Gollum in the dark, and fled awaydownthepassage,pursuedbyhisenemy’scriesofhate and despair: Thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it for ever! Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told it to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had promised to give him a present, if he won the
prologue 17 game; but when Gollum went to fetch it from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been giventohimlongagoonhisbirthday.Bilboguessedthatthis was the very ring that he had found, and as he had won the game, it was already his by right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him the wayout,asarewardinsteadofapresent.Thisaccount Bilbo setdown inhismemoirs,and heseemsneverto havealtered it himself, not even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts. But many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived no doubt from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually written by the old hobbit himself. Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo’s first story, as soon asheheardit,andhecontinuedtobeverycuriousaboutthe ring. Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truthfromthefirst:quitecontrarytohishabit.Theideaofa ‘present’ was not mere hobbitlike invention, all the same. It was suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, by Gollum’s talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his ‘birthday-present’, many times. That also Gandalf thought strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in this point for many more years, as will be seen in this book. Of Bilbo’s later adventures little more need be said here. With the help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at thegateandrejoinedhiscompanions.Heusedtheringmany times on his quest, chiefly for the help of his friends; but he kept it secret from them as long as he could. After his return tohishomeheneverspokeofitagaintoanyone,save Gandalf
18 note on the shire records and Frodo;andnooneelseinthe Shireknewofitsexistence, or so he believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of his Journey that he was writing. His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his fireplace, and his coat of marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he lent to a museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer at Bag End the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the ring, secured by a fine chain, remained in his pocket. He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his fifty-second year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable occurred in the Shire until Mr. Baggins began the prep- arations for the celebration of his hundred-and-eleventh birthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this History begins. note on the shire records At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits inthegreateventsthatledtotheinclusionofthe Shireinthe Reunited Kingdom awakened among them a more wide- spread interest in their own history; and many of their tra- ditions, up to that time still mainly oral, were collected and writtendown.Thegreaterfamilieswerealsoconcernedwith events in the Kingdom at large, and many of their members studied its ancient histories and legends. By the end of the firstcenturyofthe Fourth Agetherewerealreadytobefound in the Shire several libraries that contained many historical books and records. The largest of these collections were probably at Under- towers,at Great Smials,andat Brandy Hall.Thisaccountof theendofthe Third Ageisdrawnmainlyfromthe Red Book of Westmarch. That most important source for the history of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns,
note on the shire records 19 Wardens of the Westmarch.* It was in origin Bilbo’s private diary,whichhetookwithhimto Rivendell.Frodobroughtit back to the Shire, together with many loose leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420–1 he nearly filled its pages with his account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, probably in a single red case, were the three large volumes, boundinredleather,that Bilbogavetohimasapartinggift. To these four volumes there was added in Westmarch a fifthcontainingcommentaries,genealogies,andvariousother matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship. The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies were made, especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the children of Master Samwise. The mostimportantcopy,however,hasadifferenthistory.Itwas keptat Great Smials, butit waswritten in Gondor, probably at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and com- pletedin S.R.1592(F.A.172).Itssouthernscribeappended this note: Findegil, King’s Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain’s Book in Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, made at the request of King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and was brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64. The Thain’s Bookwasthusthefirstcopymadeofthe Red Book and contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith itreceivedmuchannotation, andmanycorrec- tions,especiallyofnames,words,andquotationsinthe Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outsidetheaccountofthe War.Thefulltaleisstatedtohave been written by Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, sometimeafterthepassingofthe King.Butthechiefimpor- tance of Findegil’s copy is thatit alone containsthe whole of Bilbo’s ‘Translations from the Elvish’. These three volumes * See Appendix B: annals 1451, 1462, 1482; and note at end of Appendix C.
20 note on the shire records were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between1403and1418,hehadusedallthesourcesavailable to him in Rivendell, both living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here. Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their greatfamilies,andatthesametimekeptuptheirconnexions with Rohan and Gondor, the libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckboroughcontainedmuchthatdidnotappearinthe Red Book. In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing with Eriador and the history of Rohan. Some of these were composedorbegunby Meriadochimself,thoughinthe Shire he was chiefly remembered for his Herblore of the Shire, and for his Reckoning of Years in which he discussed the relation of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell, Gondor, and Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old Words and Names in the Shire, showing special interest in discovering the kinship with the language of the Rohirrim of such ‘shire-words’ as mathom and old elements in place names. At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire- folk,thoughmoreimportantforlargerhistory.Noneofthem was written by Peregrin, but he and his successors collected many manuscripts written by scribes of Gondor: mainly copiesorsummariesofhistoriesorlegendsrelatingto Elendil andhisheirs.Onlyhereinthe Shireweretobefoundexten- sive materials for the history of Nu´menor and the arising of Sauron. It was probably at Great Smials that The Tale of Years* was put together, with the assistance of material collected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are often conjectural,especiallyforthe Second Age,theydeserveatten- tion. It is probable that Meriadoc obtained assistance and informationfrom Rivendell,whichhevisitedmorethanonce. There,though Elrondhaddeparted,hissonslongremained, * Represented in much reduced form in Appendix B as far as the endofthe Third Age.
note on the shire records 21 together with some of the High-elven folk. It is said that Celebornwenttodwellthereafterthedepartureof Galadriel; but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the Grey Havens, and with him went the last living memory of the Elder Days in Middle-earth.
.
THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING being the first part of The Lord of the Rings
.
BOOK ONE
.
Chapter 1 A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he would shortly be celebrating his eleventy-first birthday with a party of special magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton. Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the wonderofthe Shireforsixtyyears,eversincehisremarkable disappearance and unexpected return. The riches he had broughtbackfromhistravelshadnowbecomealocallegend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk might say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with treasure.Andifthatwasnotenoughforfame,therewasalso his prolonged vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it seemedtohavelittleeffecton Mr.Baggins.Atninetyhewas much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they began to call himwell-preserved;butunchangedwouldhavebeennearerthe mark. There were some that shook their heads and thought this was too much of a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should possess (apparently) perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth. ‘It will have to be paid for,’ they said. ‘It isn’t natural, and trouble will come of it!’ But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was generous with his money, most people were willing to for- give him his oddities and his good fortune. He remained on visiting terms with his relatives (except, of course, the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers amongthe hobbitsofpoor andunimportantfamilies. Buthe hadnoclosefriends,untilsomeofhisyoungercousinsbegan to grow up.
28 the fellowship of the ring Theeldestofthese,and Bilbo’sfavourite,wasyoung Frodo Baggins. When Bilbo was ninety-nine he adopted Frodo as hisheir,andbroughthimtoliveat Bag End;andthehopesof the Sackville-Bagginseswerefinallydashed.Bilboand Frodo happened to have the same birthday, September 22nd. ‘You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,’ said Bilbo one day; ‘and then we can celebrate our birthday-parties comfortably together.’ At that time Frodo was still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three. Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given very lively combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but now it was understood that something quite exceptional was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was going to be eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious number, and a very re- spectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130); and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33, an important number: the date of his ‘coming of age’. Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the coming event travelled all over the Shire. The history and character of Mr. Bilbo Baggins became once again the chief topic of conversation; and the older folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand. No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly known as the Gaffer. He held forth at The Ivy Bush,asmallinnonthe Bywaterroad;andhespoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before that. Now that he was himself growing old and stiffinthejoints,thejobwasmainlycarriedonbyhisyoung- est son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End. ‘A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I’ve alwayssaid,’the Gafferdeclared.Withperfecttruth:for Bilbo was very polite to him, calling him ‘Master Hamfast’, and
a long-expected party 29 consulting him constantly upon the growing of vegetables – in the matter of ‘roots’, especially potatoes, the Gaffer was recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbour- hood (including himself). ‘Butwhataboutthis Frodothatliveswithhim?’asked Old Noakesof Bywater.‘Bagginsishisname,buthe’smorethan half a Brandybuck, they say. It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.’ ‘And no wonder they’re queer,’ put in Daddy Twofoot (the Gaffer’snext-doorneighbour),‘iftheyliveonthewrong side of the Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest. That’s a dark bad place, if half the tales be true.’ ‘You’reright,Dad!’saidthe Gaffer.‘Notthatthe Brandy- bucksof Bucklandlive inthe Old Forest;butthey’re aqueer breed, seemingly. They fool about with boats on that big river–andthatisn’tnatural.Smallwonderthattroublecame of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, and in more than looks. After all his father was a Baggins. A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins; there was never much to tell of him, till he was drownded.’ ‘Drownded?’ said several voices. They had heard this and other darker rumours before, of course; but hobbits have a passion for family history, and they were ready to hear it again. ‘Well, so they say,’ said the Gaffer. ‘You see: Mr. Drogo, hemarriedpoor Miss Primula Brandybuck.Shewasour Mr. Bilbo’s first cousin on the mother’s side (her mother being the youngest of the Old Took’s daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So Mr. Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying is, if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Hall with his father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (him being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadockeepingamightygeneroustable);andhewentout
30 the fellowship of the ring boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all.’ ‘I’ve heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,’ said Old Noakes; ‘and it was Drogo’s weight as sunk the boat.’ ‘And Iheardshepushedhimin,andhepulledherinafter him,’ said Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller. ‘You shouldn’t listen to all you hear, Sandyman,’ said the Gaffer,whodidnotmuchlikethemiller.‘Thereisn’tnocall to go talking of pushing and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit still without looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo left an orphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queer Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, byall accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than a couple of hundred relations in the place. Mr.Bilbo neverdid akinderdeed thanwhenhe broughtthe lad back to live among decent folk. ‘But I reckon it was a nasty knock for those Sackville- Bagginses. They thought they were going to get Bag End, thattimewhenhewentoffandwasthoughttobedead.And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly he produces an heir, and has all the papers made out proper. The Sackville-Bagginses won’t never see the inside of Bag End now, or it is to be hoped not.’ ‘There’s a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,’ said a stranger, a visitor on business from Michel Delvinginthe Westfarthing.‘Allthetopofyourhillisfullof tunnels packed with chests of gold and silver, and jools, by what I’ve heard.’ ‘Then you’ve heard more than I can speak to,’ answered the Gaffer.‘Iknownothingaboutjools.Mr.Bilboisfreewith his money, and there seems no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel-making.Isaw Mr.Bilbowhenhecameback,amatter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I’d not long come prentice toold Holman(him being mydad’s cousin),but he
a long-expected party 31 had me up at Bag End helping him to keep folks from tram- pling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hill withaponyandsomemightybigbagsandacoupleofchests. Idon’tdoubttheyweremostlyfulloftreasurehehadpicked up in foreign parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn’t enough to fill tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that. He’s in and out of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days, he is, and he listens to all Mr. Bilbo’s tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters – meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm will come of it. ‘Elvesand Dragons!Isaystohim.Cabbagesandpotatoesare better for me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business ofyour betters,or you’llland introubletoo bigfor you,I saysto him. And I might say it to others,’ he added with a look at the stranger and the miller. But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend of Bilbo’s wealth was now too firmly fixed in the minds of the younger generation of hobbits. ‘Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he broughtatfirst,’arguedthemiller,voicingcommonopinion. ‘He’softenawayfromhome.Andlookattheoutlandishfolk thatvisithim:dwarvescomingatnight,andthatoldwandering conjuror,Gandalf,andall.Youcansaywhatyoulike,Gaffer, but Bag End’saqueerplace,anditsfolkarequeerer.’ ‘And you can say what you like, about what you know no more of than you do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,’ retorted the Gaffer,dislikingthemillerevenmorethanusual.‘Ifthat’s being queer, then we could do with a bit more queerness in these parts. There’s some not far away that wouldn’t offer a pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden walls. But they do things proper at Bag End. Our Sam says that everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and there’s going to be presents, mark you, presents for all – this very month as is.’ * * *
32 the fellowship of the ring Thatverymonthwas September,andasfineasyoucould ask. A day or two later a rumour (probably started by the knowledgeable Sam) wasspreadaboutthat thereweregoing to be fireworks – fireworks, what is more, such as had not beenseeninthe Shirefornighonacentury,notindeedsince the Old Took died. Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon laden with odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbi- ton one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. It wasdrivenbyoutlandishfolk,singingstrangesongs:dwarves with long beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End. At the end of the second week in September a cart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandy- wine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all alone.Heworeatallpointedbluehat,alonggreycloak,and asilverscarf.Hehadalongwhitebeardandbushyeyebrows that stuck out beyond the brim of his hat. Small hobbit- children ran after the cart all through Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly guessed. At Bilbo’s front door the old man began to unload: there were great bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red G and the elf-rune, . That was Gandalf’s mark, of course, and the old man was Gandalf the Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due mainly to his skill with fires, smokes, and lights. His real business was far more difficult and dangerous, but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just one of the ‘attractions’ at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children. ‘G for Grand!’ they shouted, and the old man smiled. They knew him by sight, though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had seen one of his firework displays – they now belonged to a legendary past. When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, had finished unloading, Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but
a long-expected party 33 not a single squib or cracker was forthcoming, to the dis- appointment of the onlookers. ‘Run away now!’ said Gandalf. ‘You will get plenty when thetimecomes.’Thenhedisappearedinsidewith Bilbo,and the door was shut. The young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and then made off, feeling that the day of the party would never come. Inside Bag End,Bilboand Gandalfweresittingattheopen window of a small room looking out west on to the garden. The late afternoon was bright and peaceful. The flowers glowed red and golden: snap-dragons and sunflowers, and nasturtians trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in at the round windows. ‘How bright your garden looks!’ said Gandalf. ‘Yes,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old Shire; but I think I need a holiday.’ ‘You mean to go on with your plan then?’ ‘I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven’t changed it.’ ‘Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your plan – your whole plan, mind – and I hope it will turn out for the best, for you, and for all of us.’ ‘I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday, and have my little joke.’ ‘Whowilllaugh,Iwonder?’said Gandalf,shakinghishead. ‘We shall see,’ said Bilbo. The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts.Theremighthavebeensomegrumblingabout‘dealing locally’, but that very week orders began to pour out of Bag End for every kind of provision, commodity, or luxury that could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the neighbourhood. People became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off the days on the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the postman, hoping for invitations. Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the
34 the fellowship of the ring Hobbiton post-office was blocked, and the Bywater post- office was snowed under, and voluntary assistant postmen were called for. There was a constant stream of them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you, I shall certainly come. A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: no admit- tance except on party business. Even those who had, or pretended to have Party Business were seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking off answers, packing up presents, and making some private preparations of his own. From the time of Gandalf’s arrival he remained hidden from view. Onemorningthehobbitswoketofindthelargefield,south of Bilbo’s front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions. A special entrance was cut into the bank leading to the road, and wide steps and a large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row, adjoining the field, were intensely interested and generally envied.Old Gaffer Gamgeestoppedevenpretendingtowork in his garden. The tents began to go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so big that the tree that grew in the field was right inside it, and stood proudly near one end, at the head of the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its branches. More promising still (to the hobbits’ mind): an enormous open-air kitchen was erected in the north corner of the field. A draught of cooks, from every inn and eating-house for miles around, arrived to supplement the dwarves and other odd folk that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose to its height. Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday the eve of the Party. Anxiety was intense. Then Thursday, September the 22nd, actually dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun began. Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety ofentertainmentsrolledintoone.Practicallyeverybodyliving near was invited. A very few were overlooked by accident,
a long-expected party 35 butastheyturnedupallthesame,thatdidnotmatter.Many people from other parts of the Shire were also asked; and there were even a few from outside the borders. Bilbo met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. He gave away presents to all and sundry – the latter were those who went out again by a back way and came in again by the gate. Hobbits give presents to other people on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not so lavishly as on this occasion; but it was not a bad system. Actually in Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year was somebody’s birthday, so that every hobbit in those parts had a fairchance of at leastone present atleast once a week.But they never got tired of them. On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The hobbit-children were so excited that for a while they almost forgot about eating. There were toys the like of which they hadneverseenbefore,allbeautifulandsomeobviouslymagi- cal. Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before, andhadcomeallthewayfromthe Mountainandfrom Dale, and were of real dwarf-make. When every guest had been welcomed and was finally insidethegate,thereweresongs,dances,music,games,and, of course, food and drink. There were three official meals: lunch, tea, and dinner (or supper). But lunch and tea were marked chiefly by the fact that at those times all the guests were sitting down and eating together. At other times there weremerelylotsofpeopleeatinganddrinking–continuously from elevenses until six-thirty, when the fireworks started. Thefireworkswereby Gandalf:theywerenotonlybrought by him, but designed and made by him; and the special effects, set pieces, and flights of rockets were let off by him. But there was also a generous distribution of squibs, crackers,backarappers,sparklers,torches,dwarf-candles,elf- fountains, goblin-barkers and thunder-claps. They were all superb. The art of Gandalf improved with age. Therewererocketslikeaflightofscintillatingbirdssinging withsweetvoices.Thereweregreentreeswithtrunksofdark
36 the fellowship of the ring smoke:theirleavesopenedlikeawholespringunfoldingina moment,andtheirshiningbranchesdroppedglowingflowers downupontheastonishedhobbits,disappearingwithasweet scent just before they touched their upturned faces. There werefountainsofbutterfliesthatflewglitteringintothetrees; there were pillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into eagles, or sailing ships, or a phalanx of flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain; there was a forest of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the air withayelllikeanembattledarmy,andcamedownagaininto the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And there was also one last surprise, in honour of Bilbo, and it startled thehobbitsexceedingly,as Gandalfintended.Thelightswent out. A great smoke went up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow at the summit. It spouted green and scarlet flames. Out flew a red-golden dragon–notlife-size,butterriblylife-like:firecamefromhis jaws, his eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzed three times over the heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell flat on their faces. The dragon passed like an express train, turned a somersault, and burst over Bywater with a deafening explosion. ‘That is the signal for supper!’ said Bilbo. The pain and alarm vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to their feet. There was a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that is, except those invited to the special family dinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with the tree.Theinvitationswerelimitedtotwelvedozen(anumber also called by the hobbits one Gross, though the word was notconsideredpropertouseofpeople);andtheguestswere selected from all the families to which Bilbo and Frodo were related, with the addition of a few special unrelated friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and present by parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the matter of sitting up late, especially whentherewasachanceofgettingthemafreemeal.Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.
a long-expected party 37 There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many Tooks and Brandybucks; there were various Grubbs (re- lations of Bilbo Baggins’ grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and a selection of Burrowses,Bolgers,Bracegirdles,Brockhouses,Goodbodies, Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly connected with Bilbo, and some had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before, as they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were not forgotten. Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in golden ink, that they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides, their cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing in food for many years and his table had a high reputation. Alltheonehundredandforty-fourguestsexpectedapleas- antfeast;thoughtheyratherdreadedtheafter-dinnerspeech oftheirhost(aninevitableitem).Hewasliabletodraginbits of what he called poetry; and sometimes, after a glass or two,wouldalludetotheabsurdadventuresofhismysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant,varied,andprolonged.Thepurchaseofprovisions fell almost to nothing throughout the district in the ensuing weeks;butas Bilbo’scateringhaddepletedthestocksofmost of the stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not matter much. After the feast (more or less) came the Speech. Most of the company were, however, now in a tolerant mood, at that delightful stage which they called ‘filling up the corners’. Theyweresippingtheirfavouritedrinks,andnibblingattheir favourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten. They were preparedtolistentoanything,andtocheerateveryfullstop. My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in his place. ‘Hear! Hear!Hear!’theyshouted,andkeptonrepeatingitinchorus, seeming reluctant to follow their own advice. Bilbo left his place and went and stood on a chair under the illuminated tree. The light of the lanterns fell on his beaming face; the
38 the fellowship of the ring goldenbuttonsshoneonhisembroideredsilkwaistcoat.They could all see him standing, waving one hand in the air, the other was in his trouser-pocket. My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again; and my dear Tooks and Brandybucks, and Grubbs, and Chubbs, and Burrowses, and Hornblowers, and Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Good- bodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots. ‘Proudfeet!’ shouted an elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion. His name, of course, was Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally furry, and both were on the table. Proudfoots,repeated Bilbo.Alsomygood Sackville-Bagginses that Iwelcomebackatlastto Bag End.Todayismyonehundred and eleventh birthday: I am eleventy-one today! ‘Hurray! Hur- ray! Many Happy Returns!’ they shouted, and they ham- mered joyously on the tables. Bilbo was doing splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious. Ihopeyouareallenjoyingyourselvesasmuchas Iam.Deaf- ening cheers. Cries of Yes (and No). Noises of trumpets and horns,pipesandflutes,andothermusicalinstruments.There were, as has been said, many young hobbits present. Hun- dreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of them borethemarkdale onthem;whichdidnotconveymuchto mostofthehobbits,buttheyallagreedtheyweremarvellous crackers. They contained instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one corner some of the young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo tohave finished(sincehehad plainlysaidallthat wasneces- sary), now got up an impromptu orchestra, and began a merry dance-tune. Master Everard Took and Miss Melilot Brandybuck got on a table and with bells in their hands began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous. But Bilbohadnotfinished.Seizingahornfromayoungster nearby,he blewthreeloud hoots.Thenoise subsided.Ishall not keep you long, he cried. Cheers from all the assembly. I have called you all together for a Purpose. Something in the way that he said this made an impression. There was almost
a long-expected party 39 silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears. Indeed, for Three Purposes! First of all, to tell you that I am immensely fond of you all, and that eleventy-one years is too short a time to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits. Tremendous outburst of approval. I don’t know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was unexpected and rather difficult. There was some scattered clapping, but most of them were trying to work it out and see if it came to a compliment. Secondly, to celebrate my birthday. Cheers again. I should say: OUR birthday. For it is, of course, also the birthday of my heirandnephew,Frodo.Hecomesofageandintohisinheritance today. Some perfunctory clapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of ‘Frodo! Frodo! Jolly old Frodo,’ from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what was meant by ‘coming into his inheritance’. Together we score one hundred and forty-four. Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total: One Gross, if I may use the expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of the guests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling sure they had only been asked to fill up the required number,likegoodsinapackage.‘One Gross,indeed!Vulgar expression.’ It is also, if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, the anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake;thoughthefactthatitwasmybirthdayslippedmymemory onthatoccasion.Iwasonlyfifty-onethen,andbirthdaysdidnot seem so important. The banquet was very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and could only say ‘thag you very buch’. I now repeat it more correctly: Thank you very much for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence. They all feared that a song or some poetry was now immi- nent; and they were getting bored. Why couldn’t he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo did not sing or recite. He paused for a moment. Thirdly and finally, he said, I wish to make an
40 the fellowship of the ring ANNOUNCEMENT. He spoke this last word so loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could. I regret to announce that – though, as I said, eleventy-one years is far too short a time to spend among you – this is the END. I am going. I am leaving NOW. GOOD-BYE! Hesteppeddownandvanished.Therewasablindingflash of light, and the guests all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be seen. One hundred and forty- four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless. Old Odo Proudfoot removed his feet from the table and stamped. Then there was a dead silence, until suddenly, after several deep breaths, every Baggins, Boffin, Took, Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brockhouse, Goodbody,Hornblower,and Proudfootbegantotalkatonce. It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste, and more food and drink were needed to cure the guests of shock and annoyance. ‘He’s mad. I always said so,’ was probably the most popular comment. Even the Tooks (with afewexceptions)thought Bilbo’sbehaviourwasabsurd.For the moment most of them took it for granted that his disappearance was nothing more than a ridiculous prank. Butold Rory Brandybuckwasnotsosure.Neitheragenor an enormous dinner had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter-in-law,Esmeralda:‘There’ssomethingfishyinthis, my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn’t taken the vittles with him.’ He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again. Frodowastheonlyonepresentwhohadsaidnothing.For some time he had sat silent beside Bilbo’s empty chair, and ignored all remarks and questions. He had enjoyed the joke, of course, even though he had been in the know. He had difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant surprise of the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled: herealizedsuddenlythathelovedtheoldhobbitdearly.Most of the guests went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins’ oddities, past and present; but the Sackville-
a long-expected party 41 Bagginseshadalreadydepartedinwrath.Frododidnotwant to have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for more wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass silently to the health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion. Asfor Bilbo Baggins,evenwhilehewasmakinghisspeech, hehadbeenfingeringthegoldenringinhispocket:hismagic ringthathehadkeptsecretforsomanyyears.Ashestepped down he slipped it on his finger, and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again. Hewalkedbrisklybacktohishole,andstoodforamoment listening with a smile to the din in the pavilion, and to the sounds of merrymaking in other parts of the field. Then he wentin.Hetookoffhispartyclothes,foldedupandwrapped in tissue-paper his embroidered silk waistcoat, and put it away. Then he put on quickly some old untidy garments, and fastened round his waist a worn leather belt. On it he hung a short sword in a battered black-leather scabbard. From a locked drawer, smelling of moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if they were very precious, but they were so patched and weatherstained that their original colour could hardly be guessed:itmighthavebeendarkgreen.Theywererathertoo large for him. He then went into his study, and from a large strong-box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths, and a leather-bound manuscript; and also a large bulky envelope. The book and bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy bag that was standing there, already nearly full. Into the enve- lope he slipped his golden ring, and its fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At first he put it on the mantelpiece, but suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in. ‘Hullo!’ said Bilbo. ‘I wondered if you would turn up.’ ‘I am glad to find you visible,’ replied the wizard, sitting down in a chair, ‘I wanted to catch you and have a few
42 the fellowship of the ring final words. I suppose you feel that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?’ ‘Yes, I do,’ said Bilbo. ‘Though that flash was surprising: it quite startled me, let alone the others. A little addition of your own, I suppose?’ ‘Itwas.Youhavewiselykeptthatringsecretalltheseyears, anditseemedtomenecessarytogiveyourguestssomething else that would seem to explain your sudden vanishment.’ ‘Andwouldspoilmyjoke.Youareaninterferingoldbusy- body,’ laughed Bilbo, ‘but I expect you know best, as usual.’ ‘I do – when I know anything. But I don’t feel too sure about this whole affair. It has now come to the final point. You have had your joke, and alarmed or offended most of your relations, and given the whole Shire something to talk aboutforninedays,orninety-ninemorelikely.Areyougoing any further?’ ‘Yes, I am. I feel I need a holiday, a very long holiday, as Ihavetoldyoubefore.Probablyapermanentholiday:Idon’t expect I shall return. In fact, I don’t mean to, and I have made all arrangements. ‘I am old, Gandalf. I don’t look it, but I am beginning to feel it in my heart of hearts. Well-preserved indeed!’ he snorted. ‘Why, I feel all thin, sort of stretched, if you know what Imean:likebutterthathasbeenscrapedovertoomuch bread. That can’t be right. I need a change, or something.’ Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. ‘No, it does not seem right,’ he said thoughtfully. ‘No, after all I believe your plan is probably the best.’ ‘Well,I’vemadeupmymind,anyway.Iwanttoseemoun- tains again, Gandalf – mountains; and then find somewhere where Icanrest.Inpeaceandquiet,withoutalotofrelatives prying around, and a string of confounded visitors hanging on the bell. I might find somewhere where I can finish my book. I have thought of a nice ending for it: and he lived happily ever after to the end of his days.’ Gandalflaughed.‘Ihopehewill.Butnobodywillreadthe book, however it ends.’
a long-expected party 43 ‘Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as it has gone. You’ll keep an eye on Frodo, won’t you?’ ‘Yes, I will – two eyes, as often as I can spare them.’ ‘Hewouldcomewithme,ofcourse,if Iaskedhim.Infact he offered to once, just before the party. But he does not reallywantto,yet.Iwanttoseethewildcountryagainbefore I die, and the Mountains; but he is still in love with the Shire, with woods and fields and little rivers. He ought to be comfortable here. I am leaving everything to him, of course, except a few oddments. I hope he will be happy, when he getsusedtobeingonhisown.It’stimehewashisownmaster now.’ ‘Everything?’ said Gandalf. ‘The ring as well? You agreed to that, you remember.’ ‘Well, er, yes, I suppose so,’ stammered Bilbo. ‘Where is it?’ ‘Inanenvelope,ifyoumustknow,’said Bilboimpatiently. ‘There on the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my pocket!’ He hesitated. ‘Isn’t that odd now?’ he said softly to himself. ‘Yet after all, why not? Why shouldn’t it stay there?’ Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his eyes. ‘I think, Bilbo,’ he said quietly, ‘I should leave it behind. Don’t you want to?’ ‘Wellyes– andno.Nowit comestoit,Idon’t likeparting with it at all, I may say. And I don’t really see why I should. Why do you want me to?’ he asked, and a curious change came over his voice. It was sharp with suspicion and annoy- ance. ‘You are always badgering me about my ring; but you have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.’ ‘No, but I had to badger you,’ said Gandalf. ‘I wanted the truth. It was important. Magic rings are – well, magical; and they are rare and curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may say; and I still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also I think you have
44 the fellowship of the ring haditquitelongenough.Youwon’tneeditanymore,Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.’ Bilboflushed,andtherewasanangrylightinhiseyes.His kindly face grew hard. ‘Why not?’ he cried. ‘And what business is it of yours, anyway, to know what I do with my own things? It is my own. I found it. It came to me.’ ‘Yes,yes,’said Gandalf.‘Butthereisnoneedtogetangry.’ ‘If I am it is your fault,’ said Bilbo. ‘It is mine, I tell you. My own. My Precious. Yes, my Precious.’ The wizard’s face remained grave and attentive, and only a flicker in his deep eyes showed that he was startled and indeed alarmed. ‘It has been called that before,’ he said, ‘but not by you.’ ‘But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It’s not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.’ Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. ‘You will be a fool if you do, Bilbo,’ he said. ‘You make that clearer with every wordyousay.Ithasgotfartoomuchholdonyou.Letitgo! And then you can go yourself, and be free.’ ‘I’lldoas Ichooseandgoas Iplease,’said Bilboobstinately. ‘Now, now, my dear hobbit!’ said Gandalf. ‘All your long lifewehavebeenfriends,andyouowemesomething.Come! Do as you promised: give it up!’ ‘Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!’ cried Bilbo. ‘But you won’t get it. I won’t give my Precious away, I tell you.’ His hand strayed to the hilt of his small sword. Gandalf’s eyes flashed. ‘It will be my turn to get angry soon,’ he said. ‘If you say that again, I shall. Then you will see Gandalfthe Greyuncloaked.’Hetookasteptowardsthe hobbit,andheseemedtogrowtallandmenacing;hisshadow filled the little room. Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand clutching at his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another, and the air of the room tingled. Gandalf’s eyes remained bent on the hobbit. Slowly his hands relaxed, and he began to tremble.
a long-expected party 45 ‘I don’t know what has come over you, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘You have never been like this before. What is it all about? It ismineisn’tit?Ifoundit,and Gollumwouldhavekilledme, if I hadn’t kept it. I’m not a thief, whatever he said.’ ‘I have never called you one,’ Gandalf answered. ‘And I am not one either. I am not trying to rob you, but to help you. I wish you would trust me, as you used.’ He turned away, and the shadow passed. He seemed to dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled. Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. ‘I am sorry,’ he said. ‘But I felt so queer. And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with it any more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was like an eye looking at me. And I am always wanting to put it on and disappear, don’t you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to make sure. I tried locking it up, but I found I couldn’t rest without it in my pocket. I don’t know why. And I don’t seem able to make up my mind.’ ‘Then trust mine,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is quite made up. Go awayandleaveitbehind.Stoppossessingit.Giveitto Frodo, and I will look after him.’ Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. ‘All right,’ he said with an effort. ‘I will.’ Then he shrugged his shoulders, and smiled rather ruefully. ‘After all that’s what this party business was all about, really: to give away lots of birthday-presents, and somehow make it easier to give it away at the same time. It hasn’t made it any easier intheend,butitwouldbeapitytowasteallmypreparations. It would quite spoil the joke.’ ‘Indeeditwouldtakeawaytheonlypoint Ieversawinthe affair,’ said Gandalf. ‘Very well,’ said Bilbo, ‘it goes to Frodo with all the rest.’ He drew a deep breath. ‘And now I really must be starting, or somebody else will catch me. I have said good-bye, and I couldn’t bear to do it all over again.’ He picked up his bag and moved to the door. ‘Youhavestillgottheringinyourpocket,’saidthewizard.
46 the fellowship of the ring ‘Well,so Ihave!’cried Bilbo.‘Andmywillandalltheother documents too. You had better take it and deliver it for me. That will be safest.’ ‘No,don’tgivetheringtome,’said Gandalf.‘Putitonthe mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait for him.’ Bilbotookouttheenvelope,butjustashewasabouttoset it by the clock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on the floor. Before he could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and set it in its place. A spasm of anger passed swiftly over the hobbit’s face again. Suddenly it gave way to a look of relief and a laugh. ‘Well, that’s that,’ he said. ‘Now I’m off!’ Theywentoutintothehall.Bilbochosehisfavouritestick from the stand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out of different rooms where they had been busy. ‘Iseverythingready?’asked Bilbo.‘Everythingpackedand labelled?’ ‘Everything,’ they answered. ‘Well, let’s start then!’ He stepped out of the front-door. Itwasafinenight,andtheblackskywasdottedwithstars. Helookedup,sniffingtheair.‘Whatfun!Whatfuntobeoff again, off on the Road with dwarves! This is what I have reallybeenlongingfor,foryears!Good-bye!’hesaid,looking athisoldhomeandbowingtothedoor.‘Good-bye,Gandalf!’ ‘Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself! You are old enough, and perhaps wise enough.’ ‘Take care! I don’t care. Don’t you worry about me! I am as happy now as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time has come. I am being swept off my feet at last,’ he added, and then in a low voice, as if to himself, he sang softly in the dark: The Road goes ever on and on Down from the door where it began. Now far ahead the Road has gone, And I must follow, if I can,
a long-expected party 47 Pursuing it with eager feet, Until it joins some larger way Where many paths and errands meet. And whither then? I cannot say. Hepaused,silentforamoment.Thenwithoutanotherword he turned away from the lights and voices in the field and tents, and followed by his three companions went round into his garden, and trotted down the long sloping path. He jumpedoveralowplaceinthehedgeatthebottom,andtook to the meadows, passing into the night like a rustle of wind in the grass. Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness. ‘Good-bye, my dear Bilbo – until our next meet- ing!’ he said softly and went back indoors. Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep in thought. ‘Has he gone?’ he asked. ‘Yes,’ answered Gandalf, ‘he has gone at last.’ ‘Iwish–Imean,Ihopeduntilthiseveningthatitwasonly a joke,’ said Frodo. ‘But I knew in my heart that he really meant to go. He always used to joke about serious things. I wish I had come back sooner, just to see him off.’ ‘I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,’ said Gandalf.‘Don’tbetootroubled.He’llbeallright–now. He left a packet for you. There it is!’ Frodotooktheenvelopefromthemantelpiece,andglanced at it, but did not open it. ‘You’ll find his will and all the other documents in there, I think,’saidthewizard.‘Youarethemasterof Bag Endnow. And also, I fancy, you’ll find a golden ring.’ ‘Thering!’exclaimed Frodo.‘Hasheleftmethat?Iwonder why. Still, it may be useful.’ ‘It may, and it may not,’ said Gandalf. ‘I should not make use of it, if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.’ * * *
48 the fellowship of the ring As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye to the guests. Rumours of strange events had by now spread all over the field, but Frodo would only say no doubt everything will be cleared up in the morning. About mid- night carriages came for the important folk. One by one they rolled away, filled with full but very unsatisfied hobbits. Gardeners came by arrangement, and removed in wheel- barrows those that had inadvertently remained behind. Nightslowlypassed.Thesunrose.Thehobbitsroserather later. Morning went on. People came and began (by orders) toclearawaythepavilions andthetablesandthechairs,and thespoonsandknivesandbottlesandplates,andthelanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and the crumbs and cracker-paper, the forgotten bags and gloves and handker- chiefs, and the uneaten food (a very small item). Then a number of other people came (without orders): Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers, and Tooks, and other guests that lived or were staying near. By mid-day, when even the best- fedwereoutandaboutagain,therewasalargecrowdat Bag End, uninvited but not unexpected. Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired and worried. He welcomed all the callers, but he had not much more to say than before. His reply to all inquiries was simply this: ‘Mr. Bilbo Baggins has gone away; as far as I know, for good.’ Some of the visitors he invited to come inside, as Bilbo had left ‘messages’ for them. Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of packagesandparcelsandsmallarticlesoffurniture.Onevery item there was a label tied. There were several labels of this sort: For ADELARDTOOK,forhis VERYOWN,from Bilbo;on anumbrella.Adelardhadcarriedoffmanyunlabelledones. For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspon- dence, with love from Bilbo; on a large waste-paper basket. Dorawas Drogo’ssisterandtheeldestsurvivingfemalerela- tiveof Bilboand Frodo;shewasninety-nine,andhadwritten reams of good advice for more than half a century.
a long-expected party 49 For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B.; on a gold pen and ink-bottle. Milo never answered letters. For ANGELICA’Suse,from Uncle Bilbo;onaroundconvex mirror. She was a young Baggins, and too obviously con- sidered her face shapely. For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a con- tributor;onan(empty)book-case.Hugowasagreatborrower of books, and worse than usual at returning them. For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS, as a PRESENT; on a case of silver spoons. Bilbo believed that she had acquired a good many of his spoons, while he was away on his former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When she arrived later in the day, she took the point at once, but she also took the spoons. This is only a small selection of the assembled presents. Bilbo’s residence had got rather cluttered up with things in the course of his long life. It was a tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for which the custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible. Not, of course, that the birthday-presents were always new; there were one or two old mathoms of forgotten uses that had circulated all aroundthedistrict;but Bilbohadusuallygivennewpresents, andkeptthosethathereceived.Theoldholewasnowbeing cleared a little. Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written outpersonallyby Bilbo,andseveralhadsomepoint,orsome joke. But, of course, most of the things were given where theywouldbewantedandwelcome.Thepoorerhobbits,and especially those of Bagshot Row, did very well. Old Gaffer Gamgee got two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a woollen waistcoat, and a bottle of ointment for creaking joints. Old Rory Brandybuck,inreturnformuchhospitality,gotadozen bottles of Old Winyards: a strong red wine from the South- farthing, and now quite mature, as it had been laid down by Bilbo’s father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted him a capital fellow after the first bottle.
50 the fellowship of the ring There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of course, all the chief treasures, as well as the books, pictures, and more than enough furniture, were left in his possession. Therewas,however,nosignnormentionofmoneyorjewel- lery: not a penny-piece or a glass bead was given away. Frodohadaverytryingtimethatafternoon.Afalserumour that the whole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire; and before long the place was packed with peoplewhohadnobusinessthere,butcouldnotbekeptout. Labelsgottornoffandmixed,andquarrelsbrokeout.Some people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others triedtomakeoffwithminoritemsnotaddressedtothem,or withanythingthatseemedunwantedorunwatched.Theroad to the gate was blocked with barrows and handcarts. In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo had retired for a while and left his friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely. ‘He is indisposed,’ he said. ‘He is resting.’ ‘Hiding, you mean,’said Lobelia. ‘Anyway wewant to see him and we mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!’ Merryleftthemalongwhileinthehall,andtheyhadtime to discover their parting gift of spoons. It did not improve their tempers. Eventually they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot of papers in front of him. He looked indisposed – to see Sackville-Bagginses at any rate; and he stood up, fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he spoke quite politely. The Sackville-Bagginseswereratheroffensive.Theybegan by offering him bad bargain-prices (as between friends) for various valuable and unlabelled things. When Frodo replied that only the things specially directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very fishy. ‘Only onething isclear to me,’said Otho,‘and that isthat you are doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.’
a long-expected party 51 Otho would have been Bilbo’s heir, but for the adoption of Frodo. He read the will carefully and snorted. It was, unfortunately, very clear and correct (according to the legal customsofhobbits,whichdemandamongotherthingsseven signatures of witnesses in red ink). ‘Foiled again!’ he said to his wife. ‘And after waiting sixty years. Spoons? Fiddlesticks!’ He snapped his fingers under Frodo’s nose and stumped off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out of the study to see howthingsweregoingon,andfoundherstillabouttheplace, investigating nooks and corners, and tapping the floors. He escorted her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but rather valuable) articles that had somehowfalleninsideherumbrella.Herfacelookedasifshe was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was: ‘You’ll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn’t you go too?Youdon’tbelonghere;you’reno Baggins–you–you’re a Brandybuck!’ ‘Didyouhearthat,Merry?Thatwasaninsult,ifyoulike,’ said Frodo as he shut the door on her. ‘Itwasacompliment,’said Merry Brandybuck,‘andso,of course, not true.’ Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits(two Boffins anda Bolger)who wereknockingholes inthewallsofoneofthecellars.Frodoalsohadatusslewith young Sancho Proudfoot (old Odo Proudfoot’s grandson), who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry, where he thoughttherewasanecho.Thelegendof Bilbo’sgoldexcited both curiosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously obtained, if not positively ill-gotten), is, as everyone knows, anyone’s for the finding – unless the search is interrupted. When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo collapsed on a chair in the hall. ‘It’s time to close the shop, Merry,’ he said. ‘Lock the door, and don’t open it to
52 the fellowship of the ring anyone today, not even if they bring a battering ram.’ Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea. He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the front-door. ‘Lobelia again most likely,’ he thought. ‘She musthavethoughtofsomethingreallynasty,andhavecome back again to say it. It can wait.’ He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much louder, but he took no notice. Suddenly the wizard’s head appeared at the window. ‘If you don’t let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down your hole and out through the hill,’ he said. ‘My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!’ cried Frodo, running outoftheroomtothedoor.‘Comein!Comein!Ithoughtit was Lobelia.’ ‘Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-trap towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.’ ‘She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo’s ring. I longed to disappear.’ ‘Don’tdothat!’ said Gandalf,sittingdown. ‘Dobecareful of that ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last word.’ ‘Well, what about it?’ ‘What do you know already?’ ‘Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and how he used it: on his journey, I mean.’ ‘Which story, I wonder,’ said Gandalf. ‘Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,’ said Frodo. ‘He told me the true story soon after I came to live here. He said you had pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. ‘‘No secrets between us, Frodo,’’hesaid;‘‘buttheyarenottogoanyfurther.It’smine anyway.’’’ ‘That’sinteresting,’said Gandalf.‘Well,whatdidyouthink of it all?’ ‘If you mean, inventing all that about a ‘‘present’’, well, I thought the true story much more likely, and I couldn’t see
a long-expected party 53 the point of altering it at all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do so, anyway; and I thought it rather odd.’ ‘So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures – if they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful with it. It may have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to.’ ‘I don’t understand,’ said Frodo. ‘Neither do I,’ answered the wizard. ‘I have merely begun towonderaboutthering,especiallysincelastnight.Noneed to worry. But if you take my advice you will use it very seldom, or not at all. At least I beg you not to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!’ ‘You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?’ ‘I am not certain, so I will say no more. I may be able to tellyousomethingwhen Icomeback.Iamgoingoffatonce: so this is good-bye for the present.’ He got up. ‘At once!’ cried Frodo. ‘Why, I thought you were staying on for at least a week. I was looking forward to your help.’ ‘Idid meanto –but Ihave hadto changemy mind.I may beawayforagoodwhile;but I’llcomeandseeyouagain,as soon as I can. Expect me when you see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan’t often be visiting the Shire openly again. I find that I have become rather unpopular. They say I am a nuisanceandadisturberofthepeace.Somepeopleareactu- ally accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.’ ‘Some people!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘You mean Otho and Lobelia. How abominable! I would give them Bag End and everythingelse,if Icouldget Bilbobackandgoofftramping inthecountrywithhim.Ilovethe Shire.But Ibegintowish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever see him again.’ ‘So do I,’ said Gandalf. ‘And I wonder many other things. Good-bye now! Take care of yourself! Look out for me, especially at unlikely times! Good-bye!’
54 the fellowship of the ring Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand,andwalkedoffatasurprisingpace;but Frodothought the old wizard looked unusually bent, almost as if he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not see him again for a long time.
Chapter 2 THE SHADOW OF THE PAST The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety-nine days. The second disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was dis- cussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all over the Shire, for a year and a day, and was remembered much longer than that. It became a fireside-story for young hobbits; and eventually Mad Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash andreappearwithbagsofjewelsandgold,becameafavourite characteroflegendandlivedonlongafterallthetrueevents were forgotten. Butinthemeantime,thegeneralopinionintheneighbour- hood was that Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone quite mad, and had run off into the Blue. There he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a river and come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame was mostly laid on Gandalf. ‘If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps he’ll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,’ they said.Andtoallappearancethewizarddidleave Frodoalone, and he did settle down, but the growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to carry on Bilbo’sreputationforoddity.Herefusedtogointomourning; and the next year he gave a party in honour of Bilbo’s hundred-and-twelfth birthday, which he called a Hundred- weight Feast. But that was short of the mark, for twenty guests were invited and there were several meals at which it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say. Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving Bilbo’s Birthday Party year after year until they got used to it. He said that he did not think Bilbo was
56 the fellowship of the ring dead. When they asked: ‘Where is he then?’ he shrugged his shoulders. He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many friends, especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendantsofthe Old Took)whohadaschildrenbeenfond of Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End. Folco Boffin and Fredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real name was Meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping over the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen far fromhomewalkinginthehillsandwoodsunderthestarlight. Merryand Pippinsuspectedthathevisitedthe Elvesattimes, as Bilbo had done. As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of good ‘preservation’: outwardly he retained the appearance of a robust and energetic hobbit just out of histweens.‘Somefolkhavealltheluck,’theysaid;butitwas not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age of fifty that they began to think it queer. Frodohimself,afterthefirstshock,foundthatbeinghisown master and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For some years he was quite happy and did not worry much aboutthefuture.Buthalfunknowntohimselftheregretthat he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He found himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about the wild lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had neverseencameintohisdreams.Hebegantosaytohimself: ‘Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one day.’ To which the other half of his mind always replied: ‘Not yet.’ So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his fiftieth birthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that he felt was somehow significant (or ominous); it was at any rate at that age that adventure had suddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths seemed too
the shadow of the past 57 well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay beyond their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly white spaces beyond its borders. He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in the Shire. There were rumours of strange things happening in the worldoutside;andas Gandalfhadnotatthattimeappearedor sentanymessageforseveralyears,Frodogatheredallthenews he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the Shire, could now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening, passingandnotreturning;buttheywereleaving Middle-earth and were no longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road in unusual numbers. The ancient East–West Roadranthroughthe Shiretoitsendatthe Grey Havens,anddwarveshadalwaysuseditontheirwayto their mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits’ chiefsourceofnewsfromdistantparts–iftheywantedany:as aruledwarvessaidlittleandhobbitsaskednomore.Butnow Frodo often met strange dwarves of far countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor. That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark past,likeashadowinthebackgroundoftheirmemories;but itwasominousanddisquieting.Itseemedthattheevilpower in Mirkwood had been driven out by the White Council only to reappear in greater strength in the old strongholds of Mordor.The Dark Towerhadbeenrebuilt,itwassaid.From there the power was spreading far and wide, and away far east and south there were wars and growing fear. Orcs were multiplying again in the mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer dull-witted, but cunning and armed with dreadful weapons.Andthereweremurmuredhintsofcreaturesmore terrible than all these, but they had no name. * * *
58 the fellowship of the ring Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary hobbits. But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began tohearqueertales;andthosewhosebusinesstookthemtothe borders saw strange things. The conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater, one evening in the spring of Frodo’s fiftiethyear,showedthateveninthecomfortableheartofthe Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them. Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire, and oppositehimwas Ted Sandyman,themiller’sson;andthere were various other rustic hobbits listening to their talk. ‘Queerthingsyoudohearthesedays,tobesure,’said Sam. ‘Ah,’said Ted,‘youdo,ifyoulisten.But Icanhearfireside- talesand children’s stories at home, if I want to.’ ‘No doubt you can,’ retorted Sam, ‘and I daresay there’s more truth in some of them than you reckon. Who invented the stories anyway? Take dragons now.’ ‘No thank ’ee,’ said Ted, ‘I won’t. I heard tell of them when Iwasayoungster,butthere’snocalltobelieveinthem now.There’sonlyone Dragonin Bywater,andthat’s Green,’ he said, getting a general laugh. ‘All right,’ said Sam, laughing with the rest. ‘But what about these Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They do say that one bigger than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back.’ ‘Who’s they?’ ‘My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.’ ‘Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal’s always saying he’s seen things; and maybe he sees things that ain’t there.’ ‘But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking – walking seven yards to a stride, if it was an inch.’ ‘Then Ibetitwasn’taninch.Whathesawwasanelmtree, as like as not.’ ‘Butthisonewaswalking,Itellyou;andthereain’tnoelm tree on the North Moors.’
the shadow of the past 59 ‘Then Halcan’thaveseenone,’said Ted.Therewassome laughing and clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point. ‘Allthesame,’said Sam,‘youcan’tdenythatothersbesides our Halfasthaveseenqueerfolkcrossingthe Shire–crossing it, mind you: there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders have never been so busy before. ‘And I’ve heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do say they are going to the harbours, out away beyond the White Towers.’ Sam waved his arm vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the old towers beyond the western borders of the Shire. But it was anoldtraditionthatawayovertherestoodthe Grey Havens, from which at times elven-ships set sail, never to return. ‘They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into the West and leaving us,’ said Sam, half chanting the words, shaking his head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed. ‘Well, that isn’t anything new, if you believe the old tales. And I don’t see what it matters to me or you. Let them sail! But I warrant you haven’t seen them doing it; nor anyone else in the Shire.’ ‘Well, I don’t know,’ said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had once seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day. Of all the legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments of tales and half-remembered storiesaboutthe Elvesasthehobbitsknew,hadalwaysmoved him most deeply. ‘There are some, even in these parts, as know the Fair Folk and get news of them,’ he said. ‘There’s Mr. Baggins now,that I work for.He told me thatthey were sailingandheknowsabitabout Elves.Andold Mr.Bilboknew more:many’s the talk I had with him when I was a little lad.’ ‘Oh,they’rebothcracked,’said Ted.‘Leastwaysold Bilbo was cracked, and Frodo’s cracking. If that’s where you get your news from, you’ll never want for moonshine. Well, friends, I’m off home. Your good health!’ He drained his mug and went out noisily.
60 the fellowship of the ring Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think about. For one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But Sam had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up and went out. Itwasearly Aprilandtheskywasnowclearingafterheavy rain.Thesunwasdown,andacoolpaleeveningwasquietly fading into night. He walked home under the early stars through Hobbiton and up the Hill, whistling softly and thoughtfully. Itwasjustatthistimethat Gandalfreappearedafterhislong absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. Thenhepaid Frodoabriefvisit,andaftertakingagoodlook athimhewentoffagain.Duringthenextyearortwohehad turned up fairly often, coming unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise. He would not discuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chiefly interestedinsmallnewsabout Frodo’shealthanddoings. Thensuddenlyhisvisitshadceased.Itwasovernineyears since Frodo had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the wizard would never return and had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as Sam was walking home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar tap on the study window. Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight. They looked hard at one another. ‘All well eh?’ said Gandalf. ‘You look the same as ever, Frodo!’ ‘So do you,’ Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked older and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide world, and soon they were deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the night. Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with Frodo by the open window of the study. A bright fire
the shadow of the past 61 was on the hearth, but the sun was warm, and the wind was in the South. Everything looked fresh, and the new green of spring was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the trees’ fingers. Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a hand- kerchief. His hair was perhaps whiter than it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps longer, and his face more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were as brightasever,andhesmokedandblewsmoke-ringswiththe same vigour and delight. He was smokingnow in silence, for Frodo wassitting still, deepinthought.Eveninthelightofmorninghefeltthedark shadow of the tidings that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence. ‘Last night you began to tell me strange things about my ring, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘And then you stopped, because you saidthatsuchmatterswerebestleftuntildaylight.Don’tyou think you had better finish now? You say the ring is danger- ous, far more dangerous than I guess. In what way?’ ‘Inmanyways,’answeredthewizard.‘Itisfarmorepower- ful than I ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the end it would utterly overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him. ‘In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic rings as you call them, and they were, of course, of various kinds:somemorepotentandsomeless.Thelesserringswere only essays in the craft before it was full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but trifles – yet still to my mind dangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings, the Rings of Power, they were perilous. ‘A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does not die, but he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues, until at last every minute is a weariness. And if he often uses the Ring to make himself invisible, he fades: he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks in the twilightundertheeyeofthe Dark Powerthatrulesthe Rings.
62 the fellowship of the ring Yes,soonerorlater–later,ifheisstrongorwell-meaningto begin with, but neither strength nor good purpose will last – sooner or later the Dark Power will devour him.’ ‘How terrifying!’ said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden. ‘How long have you known this?’ asked Frodo at length. ‘And how much did Bilbo know?’ ‘Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,’ said Gandalf. ‘He would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he thought would be a danger, even though I promised to look after you. He thought the ring was very beautiful,andveryusefulatneed;andifanythingwaswrong or queer, it was himself. He said that it was ‘‘growing on his mind’’, and he was always worrying about it; but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to blame. Though he had foundoutthatthethingneededlookingafter;itdidnotseem always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in an odd way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.’ ‘Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,’ said Frodo, ‘so I have always kept it on its chain.’ ‘Very wise,’ said Gandalf. ‘But as for his long life, Bilbo never connected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit for that to himself, and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and uneasy. Thin and stretched he said. A sign that the ring was getting control.’ ‘How long have you known all this?’ asked Frodo again. ‘Known?’ said Gandalf. ‘I haveknown much that only the Wiseknow,Frodo.Butifyoumean‘‘knownaboutthisring’’, well, I still do not know, one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess. ‘Whendid Ifirstbegintoguess?’hemused,searchingback in memory. ‘Let me see – it was in the year that the White Council drove the Dark Power from Mirkwood, just before the Battleof Five Armies,that Bilbofoundhisring.Ashadow
the shadow of the past 63 fell on my heart then, though I did not know yet what I feared.Iwonderedoftenhow Gollumcamebya Great Ring, as plainly it was – that at least was clear from the first. Then I heard Bilbo’s strange story of how he had ‘‘won’’ it, and I could not believe it. When I at last got the truth out of him, I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to the ring beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his ‘‘birthday- present’’. The lies were too much alike for my comfort. Clearly the ring had an unwholesome power that set to work on its keeper at once. That was the first real warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. There was little else that I could do. I could not take it from him without doing greater harm; and I had no right to do so anyway. I could only watch and wait. I might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White, but something always held me back.’ ‘Who is he?’ asked Frodo. ‘I have never heard of him before.’ ‘Maybe not,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Hobbits are, or were, no concern of his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chiefofmyorderandtheheadofthe Council.Hisknowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it, and he takes ill any meddling.Theloreofthe Elven-rings,greatandsmall,ishis province. He has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of theirmaking;butwhenthe Ringsweredebatedinthe Coun- cil, all that he would reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept – but uneasily. Still I watched and I waited. ‘And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed. Yes, they passed, and they seemed not to touch him. He showed no signs of age. The shadow fell on me again. But I said to myself: ‘‘After all he comes of a long-lived family on his mother’s side. There is time yet. Wait!’’ ‘And Iwaited.Until thatnightwhenheleftthis house.He said and did things then that filled me with a fear that no words of Saruman could allay. I knew at last that something
64 the fellowship of the ring dark and deadly was at work. And I have spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.’ ‘Therewasn’tanypermanentharmdone,wasthere?’asked Frodo anxiously. ‘He would get all right in time, wouldn’t he? Be able to rest in peace, I mean?’ ‘Hefeltbetteratonce,’said Gandalf.‘Butthereisonlyone Power in this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I know there is no Power in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be, and yet sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I think it likely that some would resist the Rings far longer than most of the Wise would believe. I don’t think you need worry about Bilbo. ‘Ofcourse,hepossessedtheringformanyyears,andused it, so it might take a long while for the influence to wear off – before it was safe for him to see it again, for instance. Otherwise,hemightliveonforyears,quitehappily:juststop as he was when he parted with it. For he gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I was not troubledaboutdear Bilboanymore,oncehehadletthething go. It is for you that I feel responsible. ‘Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you, and about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. It would be a grievous blow to the world, if the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all your kind, jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.’ Frodoshuddered.‘Butwhyshouldwebe?’heasked.‘And why should he want such slaves?’ ‘To tell you the truth,’ replied Gandalf, ‘I believe that hitherto – hitherto, mark you – he has entirely overlooked the existence of hobbits. You should be thankful. But your safety has passed. He does not need you – he has many more useful servants – but he won’t forget you again. And hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than
the shadow of the past 65 hobbits happy and free. There is such a thing as malice and revenge.’ ‘Revenge?’ said Frodo. ‘Revenge for what? I still don’t understandwhatallthishastodowith Bilboandmyself,and our ring.’ ‘Ithas everythingto dowith it,’said Gandalf. ‘Youdo not know the real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was last here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for a moment.’ Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain that hung from his belt. He unfastened it and handed it slowly to the wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy,asifeitheritor Frodohimselfwasinsomewayreluc- tant for Gandalf to touch it. Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid gold. ‘Can you see any markings on it?’ he asked. ‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘There are none. It is quite plain, and it never shows a scratch or sign of wear.’ ‘Well then, look!’ To Frodo’s astonishment and distress the wizard threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing cornerofthefire.Frodogaveacryandgropedforthetongs; but Gandalf held him back. ‘Wait!’ he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a quick look from under his bristling brows. No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got up, closed the shutters outside the window, and drewthecurtains.Theroombecamedarkandsilent,though the clack of Sam’s shears, now nearer to the windows, could still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the wizardstoodlookingatthefire;thenhestoopedandremoved the ring to the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped. ‘It is quite cool,’ said Gandalf. ‘Take it!’ Frodo received it onhisshrinkingpalm:itseemedtohavebecomethickerand heavier than ever. ‘Hold it up!’ said Gandalf. ‘And look closely!’
66 the fellowship of the ring As Frododidso,henowsawfinelines,finerthanthefinest pen-strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that seemed to form the letters of a flowing script. They shone piercingly bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth. ‘I cannot read the fiery letters,’ said Frodo in a quavering voice. ‘No,’said Gandalf,‘but Ican.Thelettersare Elvish,ofan ancient mode, but the language is that of Mordor, which I will not utter here. But this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough: One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them. It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore: Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky, Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone, Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die, One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.’ He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: ‘This is the Master-ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ringthathelostmanyagesago,tothegreatweakening
the shadow of the past 67 of his power. He greatly desires it – but he must not get it.’ Frodosatsilentandmotionless.Fearseemedtostretchout a vast hand, like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming up to engulf him. ‘This ring!’ he stammered. ‘How, how on earth did it come to me?’ ‘Ah!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is a very long story. The begin- ningsliebackinthe Black Years,whichonlythelore-masters now remember. If I were to tell you all that tale, we should still be sitting here when Spring had passed into Winter. ‘But last night I told you of Sauron the Great, the Dark Lord. The rumours that you have heard are true: he has indeed arisen again and left his hold in Mirkwood and returnedtohisancientfastnessinthe Dark Towerof Mordor. Thatnameevenyouhobbitshaveheardof,likeashadowon thebordersofoldstories.Alwaysafteradefeatandarespite, the Shadow takes another shape and grows again.’ ‘Iwishitneednothavehappenedinmytime,’said Frodo. ‘So do I,’ said Gandalf, ‘and so do all who live to see such times. But that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the time that is given us. And already, Frodo, our time is beginning to look black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are far from ripe, I think, but they are ripening. We shall be hard put to it. We should be very hard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance. ‘The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledgetobeatdownallresistance,breakthelastdefences, and cover all the lands in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring. ‘The Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid from him, and his hand never touched them or sullied them. Seven the Dwarf-kings possessed, but three he has recovered, and the others the dragons have consumed. Nine he gave to Mortal Men, proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago they fell under the dominion of the One, and they became Ringwraiths, shadows under his great Shadow, his most
68 the fellowship of the ring terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a year since the Nine walked abroad. Yet who knows? As the Shadow grows once more,theytoomaywalkagain.Butcome!Wewillnotspeak of such things even in the morning of the Shire. ‘So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Sevenalso,orelsetheyaredestroyed.The Threearehidden still.Butthatnolongertroubleshim.Heonlyneedsthe One; forhemadethat Ringhimself,itishis,andheletagreatpart ofhisownformerpowerpassintoit,sothathecouldruleall the others. If he recovers it, then he will command them all again, wherever they be, even the Three, and all that has been wrought with them will be laid bare, and he will be stronger than ever. ‘And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the One had perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been done. But he knows now that it has not perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent on it. It is his great hope and our great fear.’ ‘Why, why wasn’t it destroyed?’ cried Frodo. ‘And how did the Enemy ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, and itwassoprecioustohim?’Heclutchedthe Ringinhishand, as if he saw already dark fingers stretching out to seize it. ‘It was taken from him,’ said Gandalf. ‘The strength of the Elves to resist him was greater long ago; and not all Men were estranged from them. The Men of Westernesse came to their aid. That is a chapter of ancient history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain. One day, perhaps, I will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in full by one who knows it best. ‘But for the moment, since most of all you need to know howthisthingcametoyou,andthatwillbetaleenough,this isallthat Iwillsay.Itwas Gil-galad,Elven-kingand Elendilof Westernessewhooverthrew Sauron,thoughtheythemselves perished in the deed; and Isildur Elendil’s son cut the Ring
the shadow of the past 69 from Sauron’s hand and took it for his own. Then Sauron was vanquished and his spirit fled and was hidden for long years, until his shadow took shape again in Mirkwood. ‘Butthe Ringwaslost.Itfellintothe Great River,Anduin, and vanished. For Isildur was marching north along the east banks of the River, and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaidbythe Orcsofthe Mountains,andalmostallhisfolk were slain. He leaped into the waters, but the Ring slipped from his finger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him and killed him with arrows.’ Gandalf paused. ‘And there in the dark pools amid the Gladden Fields,’ he said, ‘the Ring passed out of knowledge and legend; and even so much of its history is known now onlytoafew,andthe Councilofthe Wisecoulddiscoverno more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think. ‘Longafter,butstillverylongago,therelivedbythebanks ofthe Great Riverontheedgeof Wilderlandaclever-handed and quiet-footed little people. I guess they were of hobbit- kind; akin to the fathers of the fathers of the Stoors, for they loved the River, and often swam in it, or made little boats of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute, for it was large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother of the folk, stern and wise in old lore, such as they had. The most inquisitive and curious-minded of that family was called Sme´agol. He was interested in roots and beginnings; he dived into deep pools; he burrowed under trees and growing plants; he tunnelled into green mounds; and he ceased to look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or the flowers opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward. ‘He had a friend called De´agol, of similar sort, sharper- eyedbutnotsoquickandstrong.Onatimetheytookaboat andwentdowntothe Gladden Fields,wherethereweregreat beds of iris and flowering reeds. There Sme´agol got out and went nosing about the banks but De´agol sat in the boat and fished. Suddenly a great fish took his hook, and before he
70 the fellowship of the ring knew where he was, he was dragged out and down into the water,tothebottom.Thenheletgoofhisline,forhethought he saw something shining in the river-bed; and holding his breath he grabbed at it. ‘Then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and a handful of mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! whenhewashedthemudaway,thereinhishandlayabeauti- ful golden ring; and it shone and glittered in the sun, so that hisheartwasglad.But Sme´agolhadbeenwatchinghimfrom behind a tree, and as De´agol gloated over the ring, Sme´agol came softly up behind. ‘‘‘Give us that, De´agol, my love,’’ said Sme´agol, over his friend’s shoulder. ‘‘‘Why?’’ said De´agol. ‘‘‘Because it’s my birthday, my love, and I wants it,’’ said Sme´agol. ‘‘‘I don’t care,’’ said De´agol. ‘‘I have given you a present already,morethan Icouldafford.Ifoundthis,and I’mgoing to keep it.’’ ‘‘‘Oh, are you indeed, my love,’’ said Sme´agol; and he caught De´agol by the throat and strangled him, because the gold looked so bright and beautiful. Then he put the ring on his finger. ‘No one ever found out what had become of De´agol; he was murdered far from home, and his body was cunningly hidden.But Sme´agolreturnedalone;andhefoundthatnone of his family could see him, when he was wearing the ring. He was very pleased with his discovery and he concealed it; and he used it to find out secrets, and he put his knowledge to crooked and malicious uses. He became sharp-eyed and keen-eared for all that was hurtful. The ring had given him power according to his stature. It is not to be wondered at that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when vis- ible) by all his relations. They kicked him, and he bit their feet. He took to thieving, and going about muttering to him- self, and gurgling in his throat. So they called him Gollum, and cursed him, and told him to go far away; and his grand-
the shadow of the past 71 mother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and turned him out of her hole. ‘He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hard- nessoftheworld,andhejourneyedupthe River,tillhecame to a stream that flowed down from the mountains, and he went that way. He caught fish in deep pools with invisible fingers andate themraw. Oneday itwas veryhot, and ashe wasbending overa pool,hefelt aburningon theback ofhis head,andadazzlinglightfromthewaterpainedhisweteyes. He wondered at it, for he had almost forgotten about the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and shook his fist at her. ‘But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far ahead the tops of the Misty Mountains,outofwhichthestreamcame.Andhe thought suddenly: ‘‘It would be cool and shady under those mountains.The Suncouldnotwatchmethere.Therootsof those mountains must be roots indeed; there must be great secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning.’’ ‘So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a little cave out of which the dark stream ran; and he wormed his way like a maggot into the heart of the hills, and vanished out of all knowledge. The Ring went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had begun to grow again, could learn nothing of it.’ ‘Gollum!’ cried Frodo. ‘Gollum? Do you mean that this is the very Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!’ ‘Ithinkitisasadstory,’saidthewizard,‘anditmighthave happenedtoothers,eventosomehobbitsthat Ihaveknown.’ ‘I can’t believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, however distantly,’ said Frodo with some heat. ‘What an abominable notion!’ ‘It is true all the same,’ replied Gandalf. ‘About their origins,atanyrate,Iknowmorethanhobbitsdothemselves. And even Bilbo’s story suggests the kinship. There was a great deal in the background of their minds and memories
72 the fellowship of the ring that was very similar. They understood one another remark- ably well, very much better than a hobbit would understand, say, a Dwarf, or an Orc, or even an Elf. Think of the riddles they both knew, for one thing.’ ‘Yes,’ said Frodo. ‘Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles,andofmuchthesamesort.Andhobbitsdon’tcheat. Gollum meant to cheat all the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo off his guard. And I daresay it amused his wickednesstostartagamewhichmightendinprovidinghim with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.’ ‘Only too true, I fear,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there was some- thingelseinit,Ithink,whichyoudon’tseeyet.Even Gollum wasnotwhollyruined.Hehadprovedtougherthanevenone of the Wise would have guessed – as a hobbit might. There wasalittlecornerofhismindthatwasstillhisown,andlight came through it, as through a chink in the dark: light out of the past. It was actually pleasant, I think, to hear a kindly voice again, bringing up memories of wind, and trees, and sun on the grass, and such forgotten things. ‘But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him angrier in the end – unless it could be conquered. Unless it could be cured.’ Gandalf sighed. ‘Alas! there is little hope of that for him. Yet not no hope. No, not though he possessed the Ringsolong,almostasfarbackashecanremember.For it was long since he had worn it much: in the black darkness itwasseldomneeded.Certainlyhehadnever‘‘faded’’.Heis thin and tough still. But the thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had become almost unbearable. ‘All the ‘‘great secrets’’ under the mountains had turned outtobejustemptynight:therewasnothingmoretofindout, nothing worth doing, only nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering. He was altogether wretched. He hated the dark, and he hated light more: he hated everything, and the Ring most of all.’ ‘Whatdoyoumean?’said Frodo.‘Surelythe Ringwashis Precious and the only thing he cared for? But if he hated it, why didn’t he get rid of it, or go away and leave it?’
the shadow of the past 73 ‘You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have heard,’ said Gandalf. ‘He hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved himself. He could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter. ‘A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. It may slip off treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he plays with the idea of handing it on to someone else’s care – and that only at an early stage, when it first begins to grip. But as far as I know Bilbo alone in history has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. He needed all my help, too.Andevensohewouldneverhavejustforsakenit,orcast it aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided things. The Ring left him.’ ‘What, just in time to meet Bilbo?’ said Frodo. ‘Wouldn’t an Orc have suited it better?’ ‘It is no laughing matter,’ said Gandalf. ‘Not for you. It was the strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far: Bilbo’s arrival just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark. ‘There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ringwastryingtogetbacktoitsmaster.Ithadslippedfrom Isildur’s hand and betrayed him; then when a chance came it caught poor De´agol, and he was murdered; and after that Gollum, and it had devoured him. It could make no further use of him: he was too small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never leave his deep pool again. So now, when its master was awake once more and sending out his dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Onlytobepickedupbythemostunlikelypersonimaginable: Bilbo from the Shire! ‘Behindthattherewassomethingelseatwork,beyondany design of the Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was meant to find the Ring, and not by its maker. In which case you also were meant to have it. And that may be an encouraging thought.’ ‘Itisnot,’said Frodo.‘Though Iamnotsurethat Iunder- standyou.Buthowhave youlearnedallthisaboutthe Ring,
74 the fellowship of the ring and about Gollum? Do you really know it all, or are you just guessing still?’ Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. ‘I knew much and I have learned much,’ he answered. ‘But I am not goingtogiveanaccountofallmydoingstoyou.Thehistory of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known to all the Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire- writing alone, apart from any other evidence.’ ‘And when did you discover that?’ asked Frodo, inter- rupting. ‘Just now in this room, of course,’ answered the wizard sharply. ‘But I expected to find it. I have come back from darkjourneysandlongsearchtomakethatfinaltest.Itisthe lastproof,andallisnowonlytooclear.Makingout Gollum’s part, and fitting it into the gap in the history, required some thought. I may have started with guesses about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.’ ‘You have seen Gollum?’ exclaimed Frodo in amazement. ‘Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. I tried long ago; but I have managed it at last.’ ‘Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?’ ‘Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum was willing to tell – though not, of course, in the way I have reported it. Gollum is a liar, and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the Ring his ‘‘birthday-present’’, and he stuck to that. He said it came from his grandmother, who had lots of beautiful things of that kind. A ridiculous story. I have no doubt that Sme´agol’s grandmother was a matriarch, agreatpersoninherway,buttotalkofherpossessingmany Elven-rings was absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a lie. But a lie with a grain of truth. ‘Themurderof De´agolhaunted Gollum,andhehadmade up a defence, repeating it to his ‘‘Precious’’ over and over again, as he gnawed bones in the dark, until he almost believed it. It was his birthday. De´agol ought to have given the ring to him. It had obviously turned up just so as to be
the shadow of the past 75 a present. It was his birthday-present, and so on, and on. ‘Ienduredhimaslongas Icould,butthetruthwasdesper- ately important, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put the fearoffireonhim,andwrungthetruestoryoutofhim,bitby bit,togetherwithmuchsnivellingandsnarling.Hethoughthe wasmisunderstoodandill-used.Butwhenhehadatlasttold me his history, as far as the end of the Riddle-game and Bilbo’s escape, he would not say any more, except in dark hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He mutteredthathewasgoingtogethisownback.Peoplewould see if he would stand being kicked, and driven into a hole andthenrobbed.Gollumhadgoodfriendsnow,goodfriends and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay forit.Thatwashischiefthought.Hehated Bilboandcursed his name. What is more, he knew where he came from.’ ‘But how did he find that out?’ asked Frodo. ‘Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum himself; and after that it would not be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than his fear of the Orcs, or even of the light. After a year or two he left the mountains. You see, though still bound by desire of it, the Ringwasnolongerdevouringhim;hebegantorevivealittle. He felt old, terribly old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry. ‘Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, andhealwayswill,Ithink;buthewascunning.Hefoundhe could hide from daylight and moonshine, and make his way swiftly and softly by dead of night with his pale cold eyes, and catch small frightened or unwary things. He grew stronger and bolder with new food and new air. He found his way into Mirkwood, as one would expect.’ ‘Is that where you found him?’ asked Frodo. ‘I saw him there,’ answered Gandalf, ‘but before that he had wandered far, following Bilbo’s trail. It was difficult to learn anything from him for certain, for his talk was con- stantly interrupted by curses and threats. ‘‘What had it got
76 the fellowship of the ring initspocketses?’’hesaid.‘‘Itwouldn’tsay,noprecious.Little cheat.Notafair question.Itcheatedfirst,itdid. Itbrokethe rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!’’ ‘Thatisasampleofhistalk.Idon’tsupposeyouwantany more.Ihadwearydaysofit.Butfromhintsdroppedamong the snarls I gathered that his padding feet had taken him at last to Esgaroth, and even to the streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering.Well, the news of the greatevents went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo’s nameandknewwherehecamefrom.Wehadmadenosecret of our return journey to his home in the West. Gollum’s sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.’ ‘Then why didn’t he track Bilbo further?’ asked Frodo. ‘Why didn’t he come to the Shire?’ ‘Ah,’ said Gandalf, ‘now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set out and came back westward, as far as the Great River. But then he turned aside. He was not daunted by the distance, I am sure. No, something else drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me. ‘The Wood-elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, forhistrailwasstillfreshthen.Through Mirkwoodandback again it led them, though they never caught him. The wood was full of the rumour of him, dreadful tales even among beasts and birds. The Woodmen said that there was some new terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to find nests; it crept into holes to find the young; it slipped through windows to find cradles. ‘But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It wandered off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves’ ken, and was lost. And then I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may prove the worst. I let the matter be. I let him go; for I had much else to think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman. ‘Well,thatwasyearsago.Ihavepaidforitsincewithmany dark and dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I
the shadow of the past 77 took it up again, after Bilbo left here. And my search would have been in vain, but for the help that I had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age of the world. Together we sought for Gollum down the whole lengthof Wilderland,withouthope,andwithoutsuccess.But at last, when I had given up the chase and turned to other paths, Gollum was found. My friend returned out of great perils bringing the miserable creature with him. ‘What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept and called us cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed him he whined and cringed, and rubbed his long hands, licking his fingers as if they pained him, as if heremembered someold torture.But Iamafraid thereis no possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step,milebymile,south,downatlasttothe Landof Mordor.’ Aheavysilencefellintheroom.Frodocouldhearhisheart beating. Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam’s shears could now be heard. ‘Yes, to Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘Alas! Mordor draws all wickedthings,andthe Dark Powerwasbendingallitswillto gather them there. The Ring of the Enemy would leave its mark,too,leavehimopentothesummons.Andallfolkwere whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred of the West. There were his fine new friends, who would help him in his revenge! ‘Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, too much for his comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on the borders he would be caught, and taken – for examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When he was found he had already been there long, and was on his way back. On some errand of mischief. But that does not matter much now. His worst mischief was done. ‘Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that the One has been found again. He knows where Isildur fell. He knows where Gollum found his ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that it is not one
78 the fellowship of the ring of the Three, for they have never been lost, and they endure noevil.Heknowsthatitisnotoneofthe Seven,orthe Nine, for they are accounted for. He knows that it is the One. And he has at last heard, I think, of hobbits and the Shire. ‘The Shire – he may be seeking for it now, if he has not already found out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he may even think that the long-unnoticed name of Baggins has become important.’ ‘Butthisisterrible!’cried Frodo.‘Farworsethantheworst that I imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I to do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!’ ‘Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike without need. And he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so little hurt from the evil, and escaped in the end, because he began his ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.’ ‘Iamsorry,’said Frodo.‘But Iamfrightened;and Idonot feel any pity for Gollum.’ ‘You have not seen him,’ Gandalf broke in. ‘No, and I don’t want to,’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t understand you. Do you mean to say that you, and the Elves, have let himliveonafterallthosehorribledeeds?Nowatanyratehe is as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy. He deserves death.’ ‘Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager to deal out death in judge- ment. For even the very wise cannot see all ends. I have not much hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, but there is a chance of it. And he is bound up with the fate of the Ring.Myhearttellsmethathehassomeparttoplayyet, forgoodorill,beforetheend;andwhenthatcomes,thepity of Bilbo may rule the fate of many – yours not least. In any case we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched. The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such kindness as they can find in their wise hearts.’
the shadow of the past 79 ‘All the same,’ said Frodo, ‘even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum,Iwishhehadnotkeptthe Ring.Iwishhehadnever found it, and that I had not got it! Why did you let me keep it?Whydidn’tyoumakemethrowitaway,or,ordestroyit?’ ‘Let you? Make you?’ said the wizard. ‘Haven’t you been listening to all that I have said? You are not thinking of what youaresaying.Butasforthrowingitaway,thatwasobviously wrong.These Ringshaveawayofbeingfound.Inevilhands itmighthavedonegreatevil.Worstofall,itmighthavefallen into the hands of the Enemy. Indeed it certainly would; for this is the One, and he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it to himself. ‘Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that has troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake that I had to take some risk – though even when I was far awaytherehasneverbeenadaywhenthe Shirehasnotbeen guardedbywatchfuleyes.Aslongasyouneverusedit,Idid not think that the Ring would have any lasting effect on you, not for evil, not at any rate for a very long time. And youmustrememberthatnineyearsago,when Ilastsawyou, I still knew little for certain.’ ‘Butwhy notdestroy it,asyou sayshouldhave beendone longago?’cried Frodoagain.‘Ifyouhadwarnedme,oreven sent me a message, I would have done away with it.’ ‘Wouldyou?Howwouldyoudothat?Haveyouevertried?’ ‘No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.’ ‘Try!’ said Gandalf. ‘Try now!’ Frododrewthe Ringoutofhispocketagainandlookedat it.Itnowappearedplainandsmooth,withoutmarkordevice that he could see. The gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was its colour, how perfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing and altogether precious. When he took it out he had intended to fling it from him into the very hottest part of the fire. But he found now that he could not do so, not without a great struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand, hesitating, and
80 the fellowship of the ring forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him; and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away – but he found that he had put it back in his pocket. Gandalflaughedgrimly.‘Yousee?Alreadyyoutoo,Frodo, cannot easily let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not ‘‘make’’you–exceptbyforce,whichwouldbreakyourmind. But as for breaking the Ring, force is useless. Even if you took it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine. ‘Your small fire, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold.This Ringhasalreadypassedthroughitunscathed,and evenunheated.Butthereisnosmith’sforgeinthis Shirethat couldchangeitatall.Noteventheanvilsandfurnacesofthe Dwarvescoulddothat.Ithasbeensaidthatdragon-firecould melt and consume the Rings of Power, but there is not now any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; norwasthereeveranydragon,noteven Ancalagonthe Black, who could have harmed the One Ring, the Ruling Ring, for that was made by Sauron himself. ‘Thereis onlyone way:to findthe Cracks of Doom inthe depths of Orodruin, the Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for ever.’ ‘I do really wish to destroy it!’ cried Frodo. ‘Or, well, to have it destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wish I had never seen the Ring! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?’ ‘Such questions cannot be answered,’ said Gandalf. ‘You may be sure that it was not for any merit that others do not possess: not for power or wisdom, at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you must therefore use such strength and heart and wits as you have.’ ‘But I have so little of any of these things! You are wise and powerful. Will you not take the Ring?’ ‘No!’cried Gandalf,springingtohisfeet.‘Withthatpower
the shadow of the past 81 I should have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring would gain a power still greater and more deadly.’ His eyes flashed and his face was lit as by a fire within. ‘Do not tempt me! For I do not wish to become like the Dark Lord himself. Yet the way of the Ring to my heart is by pity, pity for weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do not temptme!Idarenottakeit,noteventokeepitsafe,unused. The wish to wield it would be too great for my strength. I shall have such need of it. Great perils lie before me.’ He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters. Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sampassedalongthepathoutsidewhistling.‘Andnow,’said thewizard,turningbackto Frodo,‘thedecisionlieswithyou. But I will always help you.’ He laid his hand on Frodo’s shoulder. ‘I will help you bear this burden, as long as it is yourstobear.Butwemustdosomething,soon.The Enemy is moving.’ There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at his pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, but under the lids he was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the hearth, until they filled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking down into profound wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled Cracks of Doom and the terror of the Fiery Mountain. ‘Well!’ said Gandalf at last.‘What are you thinking about? Have you decided what to do?’ ‘No!’answered Frodo,comingbacktohimselfoutofdark- ness,andfindingtohissurprisethatitwasnotdark,andthat outofthewindowhecouldseethesunlitgarden.‘Orperhaps, yes. As far as I understand what you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the present, whatever it may do to me.’ ‘Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with that purpose,’ said Gandalf. ‘Ihopeso,’said Frodo.‘But Ihopethatyoumayfindsome other better keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that
82 the fellowship of the ring Iamadanger,adangertoallthatlivenearme.Icannotkeep the Ring and stay here. I ought to leave Bag End, leave the Shire, leave everything and go away.’ He sighed. ‘I should like to save the Shire, if I could – though there have been times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and have felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragonsmight be good for them. But I don’t feel like that now. I feel that as long as the Shire lies behind, safe andcomfortable,Ishallfindwanderingmorebearable:Ishall knowthatsomewherethereisafirmfoothold,evenifmyfeet cannot stand there again. ‘Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo’s or better, ending in peace. But this would mean exile, a flight from danger into danger, drawing it after me. And I suppose I must go alone, if I am to do that and save the Shire. But I feel very small, and very uprooted, and well – desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible.’ He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desiretofollow Bilboflamedupinhisheart–tofollow Bilbo, and even perhaps to find him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could almost have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done on a similar morning long ago. ‘My dear Frodo!’ exclaimed Gandalf. ‘Hobbits really are amazing creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to know about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can still surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such an answer, not even from you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though he little thought how important it would prove. I am afraid you are right. The Ring will not be able to stay hidden in the Shire much longer; and for your own sake, as well as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of Baggins behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or in the Wild. I will give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr. Underhill.
the shadow of the past 83 ‘But I don’t think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone you can trust, and who would be willing to go by your side – and that you would be willing to take into unknown perils. But if you look for a companion, be careful in choosing! And be careful of what you say, even to your closest friends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.’ Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all was very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the window. Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long arm out and downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee’s curly head hauled by one ear. ‘Well, well, bless my beard!’ said Gandalf. ‘Sam Gamgee is it? Now what may you be doing?’ ‘Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Nothing! Leastways I was just trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow me.’ He picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence. ‘I don’t,’ said Gandalf grimly. ‘It is some time since I last heard the sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?’ ‘Eavesdropping, sir? I don’t follow you, begging your pardon. There ain’t no eaves at Bag End, and that’s a fact.’ ‘Don’t be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you listen?’ Gandalf’s eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles. ‘Mr. Frodo, sir!’ cried Sam quaking. ‘Don’t let him hurt me, sir! Don’t let him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would take on so. I meant no harm, on my honour, sir!’ ‘He won’t hurt you,’ said Frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing,althoughhewashimselfstartledandratherpuzzled. ‘He knows, as well as I do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight away!’ ‘Well, sir,’ said Sam dithering a little. ‘I heard a deal that I didn’t rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and
84 the fellowship of the ring Mr.Bilbo, sir,anddragons,and afierymountain,and –and Elves, sir. I listened because I couldn’t help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless me, sir, but I do love tales of that sort. And I believe them too, whatever Ted may say. Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them. Couldn’t you take me to see Elves, sir, when you go?’ Suddenly Gandalflaughed.‘Comeinside!’heshouted,and puttingoutbothhisarmsheliftedtheastonished Sam,shears, grass-clippings and all, right through the window and stood himonthefloor. ‘Takeyoutosee Elves,eh?’ hesaid,eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile flickering on his face. ‘So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?’ ‘I did, sir. And that’s why I choked: which you heard seemingly. I tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.’ ‘It can’t be helped, Sam,’ said Frodo sadly. He had sud- denly realized that flying from the Shire would mean more painful partings than merely saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. ‘I shall have to go. But’ – and here he looked hard at Sam – ‘if you really care about me, you will keep that dead secret. See? If you don’t, if you even breathe a word of what you’ve heard here, then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a spotted toad and fill the garden full of grass- snakes.’ Sam fell on his knees, trembling. ‘Get up, Sam!’ said Gandalf.‘Ihavethoughtofsomethingbetterthanthat.Some- thingtoshutyourmouth,andpunishyouproperlyforlisten- ing. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!’ ‘Me, sir!’ cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.‘Megoandsee Elvesandall!Hooray!’heshouted,and then burst into tears.
Chapter 3 THREE IS COMPANY ‘You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,’ said Gandalf. Two or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to go. ‘Iknow.Butitisdifficulttodoboth,’heobjected.‘If Ijust vanishlike Bilbo,thetalewillbealloverthe Shireinnotime.’ ‘Of course you mustn’t vanish!’ said Gandalf. ‘That wouldn’t do at all! I said soon, not instantly. If you can think of any way of slipping out of the Shire without its being generally known, it will be worth a little delay. But you must not delay too long.’ ‘Whatabouttheautumn,onorafter Our Birthday?’asked Frodo.‘Ithink Icouldprobablymakesomearrangementsby then.’ Totell thetruth,hewas veryreluctanttostart, nowthatit had come to the point: Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than it had for years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think more kindly of journeying, as it always did at that season. He had indeed privately made up his mind to leave on his fiftieth birthday: Bilbo’s one hundred and twenty- eighth. It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one thing that made the thought of leaving bearable.Hethoughtaslittleaspossibleaboutthe Ring,and where it might lead him in the end. But he did not tell all his thoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed was always difficult to tell. Helookedat Frodoandsmiled.‘Verywell,’hesaid.‘Ithink that will do – but it must not be any later. I am getting very
86 the fellowship of the ring anxious. In the meanwhile, do take care, and don’t let out any hint of where you are going! And see that Sam Gamgee doesnottalk.Ifhedoes,Ireallyshallturnhimintoatoad.’ ‘Asforwhere Iamgoing,’said Frodo,‘itwouldbedifficult to give that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.’ ‘Don’t be absurd!’ said Gandalf. ‘I am not warning you against leaving an address at the post-office! But you are leaving the Shire – and that should not be known, until you are far away. And you must go, or at least set out, either North, South, West or East – and the direction should cer- tainly not be known.’ ‘I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End,andofsayingfarewell,that Ihaveneverevenconsidered the direction,’ said Frodo. ‘For where am I to go? And by whatshall Isteer?Whatistobemyquest?Bilbowenttofind atreasure,thereandbackagain;but Igotoloseone,andnot return, as far as I can see.’ ‘But you cannot see very far,’ said Gandalf. ‘Neither can I. It may be your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet.’ ‘Noindeed!’said Frodo.‘Butinthemeantimewhatcourse am I to take?’ ‘Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,’ answered the wizard. ‘If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey should not prove too perilous, though the Road is less easy than it was, and it will grow worse as the year fails.’ ‘Rivendell!’ said Frodo. ‘Very good: I will go east, and I will make for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.’ He spoke lightly; but his heart was moved suddenly with a desire to see the house of Elrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep valley where many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace. One summer’s evening an astonishing piece of news reached the Ivy Bush and Green Dragon. Giants and other
three is company 87 portents on the borders of the Shire were forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed he had already sold it – to the Sackville-Bagginses! ‘For a nice bit, too,’ said some. ‘At a bargain price,’ said others, ‘and that’s more likely when Mistress Lobelia’s the buyer.’ (Otho had died some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.) Justwhy Mr.Frodowassellinghisbeautifulholewaseven more debatable than the price. A few held the theory – sup- ported by the nods and hints of Mr. Baggins himself – that Frodo’s money was running out: he was going to leave Hobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the sale down in Buckland among his Brandybuck relations. ‘As far fromthe Sackville-Bagginsesasmaybe,’someadded.Butso firmlyfixedhadthenotionoftheimmeasurablewealthofthe Bagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard to believe, harder than any other reason or unreason that their fancy could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yet unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quietand didnotgo aboutbyday, itwaswell knownthathe was‘hidingupinthe Bag End’.Buthoweveraremovalmight fit in with the designs of his wizardry, there was no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland. ‘Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,’ he said. ‘Merry Brandybuck is looking out for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.’ Asamatteroffactwith Merry’shelphehadalreadychosen and bought a little house at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all but Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on the eastern borders of the Shire, and as he had lived there in childhood his going back would at least seem credible. Gandalfstayedinthe Shireforovertwomonths.Thenone evening,attheendof June,soonafter Frodo’splanhadbeen
88 the fellowship of the ring finally arranged, he suddenly announced that he was going off again next morning. ‘Only for a short while, I hope,’ he said. ‘But I am going down beyond the southern borders to getsomenews,if Ican.Ihavebeenidlelongerthan Ishould.’ He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried. ‘Has anything happened?’ he asked. ‘Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs looking into. If I think it necessary after all for you to get off at once, I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick to your plan; butbemorecarefulthanever,especiallyofthe Ring.Letme impress on you once more: don’t use it!’ Hewent offatdawn. ‘Imaybe backanyday,’ hesaid.‘At theverylatest Ishallcomebackforthefarewellparty.Ithink after all you may need my company on the Road.’ At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often what Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in the fine weather he forgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had seldom seen so fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full. Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about Gandalf again. September was passing and there was still no news of him. The Birthday, and the removal, drew nearer, and still he did not come, or send word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo’s friends came to stay and help him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco Boffin, and of course his special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck.Betweenthemtheyturnedthewhole place upside-down. On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland,conveyingthefurnitureandgoodsthat Frodohad not sold to his new home, by way of the Brandywine Bridge.The next day Frodo became really anxious, and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning, dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago for Bilbo’s great party. Still Gandalf did not appear. In the
three is company 89 evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, just adinnerforhimselfandhisfourhelpers;buthewastroubled and felt in no mood for it. The thought that he would so soonhavetopartwithhisyoungfriendsweighedonhisheart. He wondered how he would break it to them. The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, andthepartysoonbecameverycheerfulinspiteof Gandalf’s absence. The dining-room was bare except for a table and chairs, but the food was good, and there was good wine: Frodo’s wine had not been included in the sale to the Sackville-Bagginses. ‘Whateverhappenstotherestofmystuff,whenthe S.-B.s get their claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!’ said Frodo, as he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards. When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things they had done together, they toasted Bilbo’s birthday, and they drank his health and Frodo’s together according to Frodo’s custom. Then they went out for a sniff of air, and glimpseofthestars,andthentheywenttobed.Frodo’sparty was over, and Gandalf had not come. The next morning they were busy packing another cart withtheremainderoftheluggage.Merrytookchargeofthis, anddroveoffwith Fatty(thatis Fredegar Bolger).‘Someone must get there and warm the house before you arrive,’ said Merry. ‘Well, see you later – the day after tomorrow, if you don’t go to sleep on the way!’ Folcowenthomeafterlunch,but Pippinremainedbehind. Frodo was restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf. He decided to wait until nightfall. After that, if Gandalf wanted him urgently, he would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going on foot. Hisplan–forpleasureandalastlookatthe Shireasmuchas anyotherreason–wastowalkfrom Hobbitonto Bucklebury Ferry, taking it fairly easy. ‘I shall get myself a bit into training, too,’ he said, looking
90 the fellowship of the ring at himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had not done any strenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection looked rather flabby, he thought. After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-hairedson,Lotho,turnedup,muchto Frodo’sannoy- ance.‘Oursatlast!’said Lobelia,asshesteppedinside.Itwas not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of Bag End did not take effect until midnight. But Lobelia can perhaps be for- given:shehadbeenobligedtowaitaboutseventy-sevenyears longerfor Bag Endthan sheoncehoped, andshewas nowa hundredyearsold.Anyway,shehadcometoseethatnothing she had paid for had been carried off; and she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought a completeinventorywithherandwentrightthroughit.Inthe end she departed with Lotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key would be left at the Gamgees’ in Bagshot Row. She snorted, and showed plainly that she thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole during the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea. He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen. It had been officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland ‘to do for Mr. Frodo and look after his bit of garden’; an arrangement that was approved by the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia as a neighbour. ‘Our last meal at Bag End!’ said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They leftthe washing up for Lobelia. Pippinand Sam strapped up their three packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last stroll in the garden. Sam dis- appeared. Thesunwentdown.Bag Endseemedsadandgloomyand dishevelled. Frodo wandered round the familiar rooms, and saw the light of the sunset fade on the walls, and shadows creep out of the corners. It grew slowly dark indoors. He went out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of the path, and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half
three is company 91 expected to see Gandalf come striding up through the dusk. The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. ‘It’s going to be a fine night,’ he said aloud. ‘That’s good for a beginning. I feel like walking. I can’t bear any more hanging about. I am going to start, and Gandalf must follow me.’ He turnedtogoback,andthenstopped,forheheardvoices,just roundthecornerbytheendof Bagshot Row.Onevoicewas certainly the old Gaffer’s; the other was strange, and some- how unpleasant. He could not make out what it said, but he heardthe Gaffer’sanswers,whichwererathershrill.Theold man seemed put out. ‘No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went with him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, sold out and gone, I tell’ee. Why? Why’s none of my business, or yours. Where to? That ain’t no secret. He’s moved to Buckleburyorsomesuchplace,awaydownyonder.Yesitis –atidyway.I’veneverbeensofarmyself;they’requeerfolks in Buckland. No, I can’t give no message. Good night to you!’ Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why the fact that they did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief. ‘I am sick of questions and curiosity aboutmydoings,Isuppose,’hethought.‘Whataninquisitive lot they all are!’ He had half a mind to go and ask the Gaffer who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and walked quickly back to Bag End. Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo stepped inside the dark door. ‘Sam!’ he called. ‘Sam! Time!’ ‘Coming, sir!’ came the answer from far within, followed soonby Samhimself,wipinghismouth.Hehadbeensaying farewell to the beer-barrel in the cellar. ‘All aboard, Sam?’ said Frodo. ‘Yes, sir. I’ll last for a bit now, sir.’ Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam. ‘Run down with this to your home, Sam!’ he said. ‘Then cut along the Row and meet us as quick as you can at
92 the fellowship of the ring the gate in the lane beyond the meadows. We are not going throughthevillagetonight.Toomanyearsprickingandeyes prying.’ Sam ran off at full speed. ‘Well, now we’re off at last!’ said Frodo. They shouldered their packs and took up their sticks, and walked round the corner to the west side of Bag End. ‘Good-bye!’ said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He waved his hand, and thenturnedand(following Bilbo,ifhehadknownit)hurried after Peregrin down the garden-path. They jumped over the low place in the hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a rustle in the grasses. At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to the gate opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and adjusted the straps of their packs. Presently Sam appeared, trotting quickly and breathing hard; his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head a tall shapeless felt bag, which he called a hat. In the gloom he looked very much like a dwarf. ‘I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,’ said Frodo. ‘I pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.’ ‘I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,’ said Sam stoutly and untruthfully. ‘Noyoudon’t,Sam!’said Pippin.‘Itisgoodforhim.He’s got nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He’s been slack lately, and he’ll feel the weight less when he’s walked off some of his own.’ ‘Be kind to a poor old hobbit!’ laughed Frodo. ‘I shall be as thin as a willow-wand, I’m sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense. I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into it at our next packing.’ He picked up his stick again. ‘Well, we all like walking in the dark,’ he said, ‘so let’s put some miles behind us before bed.’ For a short way they followed the lane westwards. Then leavingittheyturnedleftandtookquietlytothefieldsagain.
three is company 93 They went in single file along hedgerows and the borders of coppices,andnightfelldarkaboutthem.Intheirdarkcloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings. Since theywereallhobbits,andweretryingtobesilent,theymade no noise that even hobbits would hear. Even the wild things in the fields and woods hardly noticed their passing. Aftersometimetheycrossedthe Water,westof Hobbiton, byanarrowplank-bridge.Thestreamwastherenomorethan a winding black ribbon, bordered with leaning alder-trees. A mile or two further south they hastily crossed the great road fromthe Brandywine Bridge;theywerenowinthe Tookland and bending south-eastwards they made for the Green Hill Country. As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and saw the lamps in Hobbiton far off twinkling in the gentle valley of the Water. Soon it disappeared in the folds ofthedarkenedland,andwasfollowedby Bywaterbesideits grey pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind, peepingamongthetrees,Frodoturnedandwavedahandin farewell. ‘I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,’ he said quietly. When they had walked for about three hours they rested. The night was clear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were creeping up the hill-sides from the streams and deep meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in a light wind above their heads, made a black net against the pale sky. They ate a very frugal supper (for hobbits), and then went on again. Soon they struck a narrow road, that went rolling up and down, fading grey into the darkness ahead: the road to Woodhall,and Stock,andthe Bucklebury Ferry.Itclimbed away from the main road in the Water-valley, and wound overtheskirtsofthe Green Hillstowards Woody End,awild corner of the Eastfarthing. After a while they plunged into a deeply cloven track between tall trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At first they talked, or hummed a tune softly together,beingnowfarawayfrominquisitiveears.Thenthey
94 the fellowship of the ring marched on in silence, and Pippin began to lag behind. At last, as they began to climb a steep slope, he stopped and yawned. ‘I am so sleepy,’ he said, ‘that soon I shall fall down on the road. Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.’ ‘I thought you liked walking in the dark,’ said Frodo. ‘But there is no great hurry. Merry expects us some time the day after tomorrow; but that leaves us nearly two days more. We’ll halt at the first likely spot.’ ‘The wind’s in the West,’ said Sam. ‘If we get to the other sideofthishill,weshallfindaspotthatisshelteredandsnug enough,sir.Thereisadryfir-woodjustahead,if Iremember rightly.’ Sam knew the land well within twenty miles of Hobbiton, but that was the limit of his geography. Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of fir-wood. Leaving the road they went into the deep resin- scented darkness of the trees, and gathered dead sticks and conesto makeafire.Soon theyhadamerry crackleofflame atthefootofalargefir-treeandtheysatrounditforawhile, until they began to nod. Then, each in an angle of the great tree’s roots, they curled up in their cloaks and blankets, and were soon fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo feared no danger yet, for they were still in the heart of the Shire. A few creatures came and looked at them when the fire had died away. A fox passing through the wood on business of his own stopped several minutes and sniffed. ‘Hobbits!’ he thought. ‘Well, what next? I have heard of strange doings in this land, but I have seldom heard of a hobbit sleeping out of doors under a tree. Three of them! There’s something mighty queer behind this.’ He was quite right, but he never found out any more about it. Themorningcame,paleandclammy.Frodowokeupfirst, and found that a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff. ‘Walking for pleasure! Why didn’t I drive?’ he thought, as he usually did at the beginning of an
three is company 95 expedition.‘Andallmybeautifulfeatherbedsaresoldtothe Sackville-Bagginses! These tree-roots would do them good.’ He stretched. ‘Wake up, hobbits!’ he cried. ‘It’s a beautiful morning.’ ‘What’s beautiful about it?’ said Pippin, peering over the edge of his blanket with one eye. ‘Sam! Get breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have you got the bath-water hot?’ Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. ‘No, sir, I haven’t, sir!’ he said. Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him over, and then walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastwardthesunwasrisingredoutofthemiststhatlaythick on the world. Touched with gold and red the autumn trees seemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared. When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good fire going. ‘Water!’ shouted Pippin. ‘Where’s the water?’ ‘I don’t keep water in my pockets,’ said Frodo. ‘Wethoughtyouhadgonetofindsome,’said Pippin,busy setting out the food, and cups. ‘You had better go now.’ ‘You can come too,’ said Frodo, ‘and bring all the water- bottles.’Therewasastreamatthefootofthehill.Theyfilled theirbottlesandthesmallcampingkettleatalittlefallwhere thewaterfella fewfeetoveranoutcropof greystone.Itwas icy cold; and they spluttered and puffed as they bathed their faces and hands. When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again, it was after ten o’clock, and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot. They went down the slope, and across the stream where it dived under the road, and up the next slope,andupanddownanothershoulderofthehills;andby that time their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gear already seemed a heavy burden. The day’s march promised to be warm and tiring work. After some miles, however, the road ceased to roll up and down: it climbed to the top of a steep bank in a weary
96 the fellowship of the ring zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to go down for thelasttime.Infrontofthemtheysawthelowerlandsdotted with small clumps of trees that melted away in the distance to a brown woodland haze. They were looking across the Woody Endtowardsthe Brandywine River.Theroadwound away before them like a piece of string. ‘The road goes on for ever,’ said Pippin; ‘but I can’t with- outarest.Itishightimeforlunch.’Hesatdownonthebank at the side of the road and looked away east into the haze, beyondwhichlaythe River,andtheendofthe Shireinwhich he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round eyes were wide open – for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a new horizon. ‘Do Elves live in those woods?’ he asked. ‘Not that I ever heard,’ said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He too was gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it before. Suddenly he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly: The Road goes ever on and on Down from the door where it began. Now far ahead the Road has gone, And I must follow, if I can, Pursuing it with weary feet, Until it joins some larger way, Where many paths and errands meet. And whither then? I cannot say. ‘Thatsoundslikeabitofold Bilbo’srhyming,’said Pippin. ‘Or is it one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging.’ ‘I don’t know,’said Frodo. ‘It cameto me then, asif I was making it up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds me very much of Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was only one Road; thatitwaslikeagreatriver:itsspringswereateverydoorstep, and every path was its tributary. ‘‘It’s a dangerous business,
three is company 97 Frodo, going out of your door,’’ he used to say. ‘‘You step into the Road, and if you don’t keep your feet, there is no knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realize that this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood, and that if you let it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain orevenfurtherandtoworseplaces?’’Heusedtosaythaton the path outside the front door at Bag End, especially after he had been out for a long walk.’ ‘Well, the Road won’t sweep me anywhere for an hour at least,’ said Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example, putting their packs against the bank and their legs out into the road. After a rest they had a good lunch, and then more rest. Thesunwasbeginningtogetlowandthelightofafternoon was on the land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road. This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little traffic to the Woody End.Theyhadbeenjoggingalongagainforanhour or more when Sam stopped a moment as if listening. They were now on level ground, and the road after much winding laystraightaheadthroughgrass-landsprinkledwithtalltrees, outliers of the approaching woods. ‘I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,’ said Sam. Theylookedback,buttheturnoftheroadpreventedthem fromseeingfar.‘Iwonderifthatis Gandalfcomingafterus,’ said Frodo;butevenashesaidit,hehadafeelingthatitwas notso,andasuddendesiretohidefromtheviewoftherider came over him. ‘It may not matter much,’ he said apologetically, ‘but I would rather not be seen on the road – by anyone. I am sick of my doings being noticed and discussed. And if it is Gandalf,’ he added as an afterthought, ‘we can give him a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let’s get out of sight!’ Theothertworanquicklytotheleftanddownintoalittle
98 the fellowship of the ring hollow not far from the road. There they lay flat. Frodo hesitated for a second: curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire to hide. The sound of hoofs drew nearer.Justintimehethrewhimselfdowninapatchoflong grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head and peered cautiously above one of the great roots. Roundthecornercameablackhorse,nohobbit-ponybut a full-sized horse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to crouch in the saddle, wrapped in a great black cloak and hood, so that only his boots in the high stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and invisible. When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped. The riding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From inside the hood came a noise as ofsomeonesniffingtocatchanelusivescent;theheadturned from side to side of the road. Asuddenunreasoningfearofdiscoverylaidholdof Frodo, and he thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and yetthedesiretogetitoutofhispocketbecamesostrongthat he began slowly to move his hand. He felt that he had only toslipiton,andthenhewouldbesafe.Theadviceof Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. ‘And I am still in the Shire,’ he thought, as his hand touched the chain on which it hung. At that moment the rider sat up, and shook thereins. Thehorse steppedforward, walkingslowlyat first, and then breaking into a quick trot. Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until he dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it seemed to him that suddenly, before it passed out of sight, the horse turned aside and went into the trees on the right. ‘Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,’ said Frodo to himself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam had remained flat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and his strange behaviour.
three is company 99 ‘Ican’tsaywhy,but Ifeltcertainhewaslookingorsmelling for me; and also I felt certain that I did not want him to discover me. I’ve never seen or felt anything like it in the Shire before.’ ‘But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?’ said Pippin. ‘Andwhat is he doingin this part ofthe world?’ ‘There are some Men about,’ said Frodo. ‘Down in the Southfarthing they have had trouble with Big People, I believe. But I have never heard of anything like this rider. I wonder where he comes from.’ ‘Begging your pardon,’ put in Sam suddenly, ‘I know wherehecomesfrom.It’sfrom Hobbitonthatthishereblack ridercomes,unlessthere’smorethanone.And Iknowwhere he’s going to.’ ‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment. ‘Why didn’t you speak up before?’ ‘I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I gotbacktoourholeyesterdayeveningwiththekey,mydad, he says to me: Hallo, Sam! he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There’s been a strange customer askingfor Mr.Bagginsof Bag End,andhe’sonlyjustgone.I’ve senthimonto Bucklebury.Notthat Ilikedthesoundofhim.He seemedmightyputout,when Itoldhim Mr.Bagginshadlefthis old home for good. Hissed at me, he did. It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was he? says I to the Gaffer. I don’t know, says he; but he wasn’t a hobbit. He was tall and black-like,andhestoopedoverme.Ireckonitwasoneofthe Big Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny. ‘I couldn’t stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting; and Ididn’tgivemuchheedtoitmyself.The Gafferisgetting old, and more than a bit blind, and it must have been near darkwhenthisfellowcomeupthe Hillandfoundhimtaking theairattheendofour Row.Ihopehehasn’tdonenoharm, sir, nor me.’ ‘The Gaffer can’t be blamed anyway,’ said Frodo. ‘As a matter of fact I heard him talking to a stranger, who seemed tobeinquiringforme,and Inearlywentandaskedhimwho
100 the fellowship of the ring it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about it before. I might have been more careful on the road.’ ‘Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and the Gaffer’sstranger,’said Pippin.‘Weleft Hobbitonsecretly enough, and I don’t see how he could have followed us.’ ‘What about the smelling, sir?’ said Sam. ‘And the Gaffer said he was a black chap.’ ‘I wish I had waited for Gandalf,’ Frodo muttered. ‘But perhaps it would only have made matters worse.’ ‘Thenyouknoworguesssomethingaboutthisrider?’said Pippin, who had caught the muttered words. ‘I don’t know, and I would rather not guess,’ said Frodo. ‘All right, cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present,ifyouwanttobemysterious.Inthemeanwhilewhat are we to do? I should like a bite and a sup, but somehow I thinkwehadbettermoveonfromhere.Yourtalkofsniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.’ ‘Yes, I think we will move on now,’ said Frodo; ‘but not ontheroad–incasethatridercomesback,oranotherfollows him. We ought to do a good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.’ The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass, as they started off again. They now kept a stone’s throw to the left of the road, and kept out of sight of it as much as they could. But this hindered them; for the grass was thick andtussocky,andthegrounduneven,andthetreesbeganto draw together into thickets. Thesunhadgonedownredbehindthehillsattheirbacks, and evening was coming on before they came back to the roadattheendofthelongleveloverwhichithadrunstraight for some miles. At that point it bent left and went down into the lowlands of the Yale making for Stock; but a lane branchedright,windingthroughawoodofancientoak-trees on its way to Woodhall. ‘That is the way for us,’ said Frodo. Notfarfromtheroad-meetingtheycameonthehugehulk ofatree:itwasstillaliveandhadleavesonthesmallbranches
three is company 101 thatithadputoutroundthebrokenstumpsofitslong-fallen limbs; but it was hollow, and could be entered by a great crack on the side away from the road. The hobbits crept inside, and sat there upon a floor of old leaves and decayed wood. They rested and had a light meal, talking quietly and listening from time to time. Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the road began to fall gently but steadily intothedusk.Astarcameoutabovethetreesinthedarkening East before them. They went abreast and in step, to keep up their spirits. After a time, as the stars grew thicker and brighter, the feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer listened for the sound of hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk along, especially when they are drawing near to home at night. With most hobbits it is a supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits hummedawalking-song(thoughnot,ofcourse,withoutany mention of supper and bed). Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune that was as old as the hills, and taught it to Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the Water-valley and talked about Adventure. Upon the hearth the fire is red, Beneath the roof there is a bed; But not yet weary are our feet, Still round the corner we may meet A sudden tree or standing stone That none have seen but we alone. Tree and flower and leaf and grass, Let them pass! Let them pass! Hill and water under sky, Pass them by! Pass them by! Still round the corner there may wait A new road or a secret gate, And though we pass them by today,
102 the fellowship of the ring Tomorrow we may come this way And take the hidden paths that run Towards the Moon or to the Sun. Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe, Let them go! Let them go! Sand and stone and pool and dell, Fare you well! Fare you well! Home is behind, the world ahead, And there are many paths to tread Through shadows to the edge of night, Until the stars are all alight. Then world behind and home ahead, We’ll wander back to home and bed. Mist and twilight, cloud and shade, Away shall fade! Away shall fade! Fire and lamp, and meat and bread, And then to bed! And then to bed! The song ended. ‘And now to bed! And now to bed!’ sang Pippin in a high voice. ‘Hush!’ said Frodo. ‘I think I hear hoofs again.’ They stopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree- shadows, listening. There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, somewaybehind,butcomingslowandcleardownthewind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and ran into the deeper shade under the oak-trees. ‘Don’t let us go too far!’ said Frodo. ‘I don’t want to be seen, but I want to see if it is another Black Rider.’ ‘Very well!’ said Pippin. ‘But don’t forget the sniffing!’ The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-placebetterthanthegeneraldarknessunderthetrees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. It showed greyandpale,alineoffadinglightthroughthewood.Above itthestarswerethickinthedimsky,buttherewasnomoon. The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw
three is company 103 something dark pass across the lighter space between two trees, and then halt. It looked like the black shade of a horse ledbyasmallerblackshadow.Theblackshadowstoodclose tothepointwheretheyhadleftthepath,anditswayedfrom side to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of snuffling. The shadow bent to the ground, and then began to crawl towards him. Oncemorethedesiretosliponthe Ringcameover Frodo; but this time it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before he realized what he was doing, his hand was gropinginhispocket.Butatthatmomenttherecameasound like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated. It climbedon to the shadowy horse andseemed to vanish across the lane into the darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again. ‘Elves!’exclaimed Saminahoarsewhisper.‘Elves,sir!’He wouldhaveburstoutofthetreesanddashedofftowardsthe voices, if they had not pulled him back. ‘Yes, it is Elves,’ said Frodo. ‘One can meet them some- times in the Woody End. They don’t live in the Shire, but they wander into it in spring and autumn, out of their own lands away beyond the Tower Hills. I am thankful that they do! You did not see, but that Black Rider stopped just here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he heard the voices he slipped away.’ ‘What about the Elves?’ said Sam, too excited to trouble about the rider. ‘Can’t we go and see them?’ ‘Listen! They are coming this way,’ said Frodo. ‘We have only to wait.’ The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above the others. It was singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and the others knew nothing. Yet the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape itself in their thought into words which they only partly under- stood. This was the song as Frodo heard it:
104 the fellowship of the ring Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear! O Queen beyond the Western Seas! O Light to us that wander here Amid the world of woven trees! Gilthoniel! O Elbereth! Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath! Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee In a far land beyond the Sea. O stars that in the Sunless Year With shining hand by her were sown, In windy fields now bright and clear We see your silver blossom blown! O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! We still remember, we who dwell In this far land beneath the trees, Thy starlight on the Western Seas. The song ended. ‘These are High Elves! They spoke the name of Elbereth!’ said Frodo in amazement. ‘Few of that fairest folk are ever seen in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth, east of the Great Sea. This is indeed a strange chance!’ Thehobbitssatinshadowbythewayside.Beforelongthe Elves came down the lane towards the valley. They passed slowly,andthehobbitscouldseethestarlightglimmeringon their hair and in their eyes. They bore no lights, yet as they walked a shimmer, like the light of the moon above the rim ofthehillsbeforeitrises,seemedtofallabouttheirfeet.They were now silent, and as the last Elf passed he turned and looked towards the hobbits and laughed. ‘Hail, Frodo!’ he cried. ‘You are abroad late. Or are you perhaps lost?’ Then he called aloud to the others, and all the company stopped and gathered round. ‘This is indeed wonderful!’ they said. ‘Three hobbits in a
three is company 105 wood at night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo went away. What is the meaning of it?’ ‘Themeaningofit,fairpeople,’said Frodo,‘issimplythat we seem to be going the same way as you are. I like walking under the stars. But I would welcome your company.’ ‘But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are sodull,’theylaughed.‘Andhowdoyouknowthatwegothe samewayasyou,foryoudonotknowwhitherwearegoing?’ ‘Andhow doyou knowmy name?’asked Frodoin return. ‘We know many things,’ they said. ‘We have seen you often before with Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.’ ‘Who are you, and who is your lord?’ asked Frodo. ‘I am Gildor,’ answered their leader, the Elf who had first hailedhim.‘Gildor Inglorionofthe Houseof Finrod.Weare Exiles, and most of our kindred have long ago departed and wetooarenowonlytarryinghereawhile,erewereturnover the Great Sea. But some of our kinsfolk dwell still in peace in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing? For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.’ ‘OWise People!’interrupted Pippineagerly.‘Tellusabout the Black Riders!’ ‘Black Riders?’ they said in low voices. ‘Why do you ask about Black Riders?’ ‘Becausetwo Black Ridershaveovertakenustoday,orone has done so twice,’ said Pippin; ‘only a little while ago he slipped away as you drew near.’ The Elvesdidnotansweratonce,butspoketogethersoftly in their own tongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits. ‘We will not speak of this here,’ he said. ‘We think you had bestcomenowwithus.Itisnotourcustom,butforthistime we will take you on our road, and you shall lodge with us tonight, if you will.’ ‘O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope,’ said Pippin. Sam was speechless. ‘I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,’ said Frodo bowing. ‘Elen s´ıla lu´menn’ omentielvo, a star shines on the hour of our meeting,’ he added in the High-elven speech.
106 the fellowship of the ring ‘Be careful, friends!’ cried Gildor laughing. ‘Speak no secrets! Here is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was a good master. Hail, Elf-friend!’ he said, bowing to Frodo. ‘Come now with your friends and join our company! You had best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. You may be weary before we halt.’ ‘Why? Where are you going?’ asked Frodo. ‘For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Wood- hall. It is some miles, but you shall have rest at the end of it, and it will shorten your journey tomorrow.’ They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faint lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) could walk when they wished without sound or footfall. Pippinsoonbegantofeelsleepy,andstaggeredonceortwice; but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and saved him from a fall. Sam walked along at Frodo’s side, as if in a dream,withanexpressiononhisfacehalfoffearandhalfof astonished joy. The woods on either side became denser; the trees were nowyoungerandthicker;andasthelanewentlower,running downintoafoldofthehills,thereweremanydeepbrakesof hazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At last the Elves turned aside from the path. A green ride lay almost unseen through the thickets on the right; and this they followed as it wound away back up the wooded slopes on to the top of a shoulder of the hills that stood out into the lower land of the river-valley. Suddenly they came out of the shadow of the trees, and before them lay a wide space of grass, grey under the night. On three sides the woods pressed upon it; but eastward the ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of the slope, were below their feet. Beyond, the low lands lay dim and flat under the stars. Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the village of Woodhall. The Elvessatonthegrassandspoketogetherinsoftvoices; they seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo
three is company 107 and his companions wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets,anddrowsinessstoleoverthem.Thenightgrewon, and the lights in the valley went out. Pippin fell asleep, pillowed on a green hillock. Awayhighinthe Eastswung Remmirath,the Netted Stars, and slowly above the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jeweloffire.Thenbysomeshiftofairsallthemistwasdrawn away like a veil, and there leaned up, as he climbed over the rim of the world, the Swordsman of the Sky, Menelvagor withhisshiningbelt.The Elvesallburstintosong.Suddenly under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light. ‘Come!’the Elvescalledtothehobbits.‘Come!Nowisthe time for speech and merriment!’ Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. ‘There is a fire in the hall, and food for hungry guests,’ said an Elf standing before him. At the south end of the greensward there was an opening. There the green floor ran on into the wood, and formed a wide space like a hall, roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each side. In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars torches with lights of gold and silver were burning steadily. The Elvessatroundthefireuponthegrassoruponthesawn rings of old trunks. Some went to and fro bearing cups and pouring drink; others brought food on heaped plates and dishes. ‘This is poor fare,’ they said to the hobbits; ‘for we are lodging in the greenwood far from our halls. If ever you are our guests at home, we will treat you better.’ ‘It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,’ said Frodo. Pippinafterwardsrecalled littleofeitherfood ordrink,for his mind was filled with the light upon the elf-faces, and the sound of voices so various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking dream. But he remembered that there was bread, surpassingthesavourofafairwhiteloaftoonewhoisstarv- ing;andfruitssweetaswildberriesandricherthanthetended
108 the fellowship of the ring fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was filled with a fragrantdraught,coolasaclearfountain,goldenasasummer afternoon. Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself,whathefeltorthoughtthatnight,thoughitremained in his memory as one of the chief events of his life. The nearest he ever got was to say: ‘Well, sir, if I could grow apples like that, I would call myself a gardener. But it was thesingingthatwent tomyheart,ifyouknow what Imean.’ Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind was chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listened eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them in their own language. They smiled at him and said laughing: ‘Here is a jewel among hobbits!’ After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and slept the rest of the night away. Sam refusedtoleave hismaster.When Pippin hadgone,hecame and sat curled up at Frodo’s feet, where at last he nodded andclosedhiseyes.Frodoremainedlongawake,talkingwith Gildor. Theyspokeofmanythings,oldandnew,and Frodoques- tioned Gildor much about happenings in the wide world outsidethe Shire.Thetidingsweremostlysadandominous: of gathering darkness, the wars of Men, and the flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest to his heart: ‘Tellme,Gildor,haveyoueverseen Bilbosinceheleftus?’ Gildorsmiled.‘Yes,’heanswered.‘Twice.Hesaidfarewell to us on this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from here.’ He would say no more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent. ‘Youdonotaskmeortellmemuchthatconcernsyourself, Frodo,’ said Gildor. ‘But I already know a little, and I can readmoreinyourfaceandinthethoughtbehindyourques-
three is company 109 tions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you doubt that you will find what you seek, or accomplish what you intend, or that you will ever return. Is not that so?’ ‘It is,’ said Frodo; ‘but I thought my going was a secret known only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam.’ He looked down at Sam, who was snoring gently. ‘Thesecretwillnotreachthe Enemyfromus,’said Gildor. ‘The Enemy?’ said Frodo. ‘Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?’ ‘I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing you,’ answered Gildor; ‘but I perceive that he is – strange indeed though that seems to me. And I warn you that peril is now both before you and behind you, and upon either side.’ ‘You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of the Enemy. What are the Black Riders?’ ‘Has Gandalf told you nothing?’ ‘Nothing about such creatures.’ ‘Then I think it is not for me to say more – lest terror should keep you from your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only just in time, if indeed you are in time. You must now make haste, and neither stay nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.’ ‘I cannot imagine what information could be more terrify- ing than yourhints and warnings,’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘I knew thatdangerlayahead,ofcourse;but Ididnotexpecttomeet it in our own Shire. Can’t a hobbit walk from the Water to the River in peace?’ ‘But it is not your own Shire,’ said Gildor. ‘Others dwelt here before hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. The wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for ever fence it out.’ ‘Iknow–andyetithasalwaysseemedsosafeandfamiliar. Whatcan Idonow?My planwastoleave the Shiresecretly, and make my way to Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.’
110 the fellowship of the ring ‘Ithinkyoushouldstillfollowthatplan,’said Gildor.‘Ido notthinkthe Roadwillprovetoohardforyourcourage.But if you desire clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do not know the reason for your flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your pursuers will assail you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you will see him before you leave the Shire?’ ‘Ihopeso.Butthatisanotherthingthatmakesmeanxious. I have been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but he has never appeared. Now I am wondering what can have happened. Should I wait for him?’ Gildor was silent for a moment. ‘I do not like this news,’ he said at last. ‘That Gandalf should be late, does not bode well. But it is said: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait.’ ‘And it is also said,’ answered Frodo: ‘Go not to the Elves for counsel, for they will say both no and yes.’ ‘Is it indeed?’ laughed Gildor. ‘Elves seldom give un- guardedadvice, foradvice isadangerous gift,evenfrom the wise to the wise, and all courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning yourself; and how thenshall Ichoosebetterthanyou?Butifyoudemandadvice, I will for friendship’s sake give it. I think you should now go at once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone. Take such friends as are trusty and willing. Now you should be grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly. The Elves have their own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little concerned with the ways of hobbits, or of any other creatures upon earth. Our paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting there may be more than chance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I fear to say too much.’ ‘I am deeply grateful,’ said Frodo; ‘but I wish you would tellmeplainlywhatthe Black Ridersare.If Itakeyouradvice
three is company 111 I may not see Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know what is the danger that pursues me.’ ‘Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the Enemy?’ answered Gildor. ‘Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are deadly. Ask no more of me! But my heart forbodesthat,ereallisended,you,Frodosonof Drogo,will know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. May Elbereth protect you!’ ‘But where shall I find courage?’ asked Frodo. ‘That is what I chiefly need.’ ‘Courage is found in unlikely places,’ said Gildor. ‘Be of goodhope!Sleepnow!Inthemorningweshallhavegone;but wewillsendourmessagesthroughthelands.The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey, and those that have powerforgoodshallbeonthewatch.Inameyou Elf-friend; and may the stars shine upon the end of your road! Seldom have we had such delight in strangers, and it is fair to hear wordsofthe Ancient Speechfromthelipsofotherwanderers in the world.’ Frodofeltsleepcominguponhim,evenas Gildorfinished speaking. ‘I will sleep now,’ he said; and the Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber.
Chapter 4 A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a bowermadebyalivingtreewithbrancheslacedanddrooping to the ground; his bed was of fern and grass, deep and soft and strangely fragrant. The sun was shining through the fluttering leaves, which were still green upon the tree. He jumped up and went out. Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood. Pippin was standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the Elves. ‘Theyhaveleftusfruitanddrink,andbread,’said Pippin. ‘Come and have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. I did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.’ Frodosatdownbeside Samandbegantoeat.‘Whatisthe plan for today?’ asked Pippin. ‘To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,’ answered Frodo, and gave his attention to the food. ‘Doyouthinkweshallseeanythingofthose Riders?’asked Pippin cheerfully. Under the morning sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of them did not seem very alarming to him. ‘Yes, probably,’ said Frodo, not liking the reminder. ‘But I hope to get across the river without their seeing us.’ ‘Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?’ ‘Not much – only hints and riddles,’ said Frodo evasively. ‘Did you ask about the sniffing?’ ‘We didn’t discuss it,’ said Frodo with his mouth full. ‘You should have. I am sure it is very important.’ ‘Inthatcase Iamsure Gildorwouldhaverefusedtoexplain it,’said Frodosharply.‘Andnowleavemeinpeaceforabit!
a short cut to mushrooms 113 Idon’twanttoanswerastringofquestionswhile Iameating. I want to think!’ ‘Good heavens!’ said Pippin. ‘At breakfast?’ He walked away towards the edge of the green. From Frodo’s mind the bright morning – treacherously bright,hethought–hadnotbanishedthefearofpursuit;and heponderedthewordsof Gildor.Themerryvoiceof Pippin came to him. He was running on the green turf and singing. ‘No!Icouldnot!’hesaidtohimself.‘Itisonethingtotake my young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary, and food and bed are sweet. To take them into exile, where hunger and weariness may have no cure, is quite another – even if they are willing to come. The inheritance is mine alone. I don’t think I ought even to take Sam.’ He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him. ‘Well,Sam!’hesaid.‘Whataboutit?Iamleavingthe Shire as soon as ever I can – in fact I have made up my mind now not even to wait a day at Crickhollow, if it can be helped.’ ‘Very good, sir!’ ‘You still mean to come with me?’ ‘I do.’ ‘Itisgoingtobeverydangerous,Sam.Itisalreadydanger- ous. Most likely neither of us will come back.’ ‘If you don’t come back, sir, then I shan’t, that’s certain,’ said Sam. ‘Don’t you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never mean to. I am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon; and if any of those Black Riders try to stop him, they’ll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with, I said. They laughed.’ ‘Who are they, and what are you talking about?’ ‘The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they seemedtoknowyouweregoingaway,so Ididn’tseetheuse of denying it. Wonderful folk, Elves, sir! Wonderful!’ ‘They are,’ said Frodo. ‘Do you like them still, now you have had a closer view?’ ‘They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak,’ answered Sam slowly. ‘It don’t seem to matter what I think
114 the fellowship of the ring aboutthem.They arequitedifferentfrom what Iexpected– so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it were.’ Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outward sign of the odd change that seemed to have comeoverhim.Itdidnotsoundlikethevoiceoftheold Sam Gamgee that he thought he knew. But it looked like the old Sam Gamgeesittingthere,exceptthathisfacewasunusually thoughtful. ‘Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now – now that your wish to see them has come true already?’ he asked. ‘Yes, sir. I don’t know how to say it, but after last night I feel different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I know we are going to take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can’t turn back. It isn’t to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want – I don’t rightly know what I want: but I have something to do before the end, and it lies ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, if you understand me.’ ‘I don’t altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose me a good companion. I am content. We will go together.’ Frodo finished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked over the land ahead, and called to Pippin. ‘All ready to start?’ he said as Pippin ran up. ‘We must be getting off at once. We slept late; and there are a good many miles to go.’ ‘You slept late, you mean,’ said Pippin. ‘I was up long before; and we are only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking.’ ‘I have finished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry as quickly as possible. I am not going out of the way, back to the road we left last night: I am going to cut straight across country from here.’ ‘Then you are going to fly,’ said Pippin. ‘You won’t cut straight on foot anywhere in this country.’ ‘We can cut straighter than the road anyway,’ answered Frodo. ‘The Ferry is east from Woodhall; but the hard road curves away to the left – you can see a bend of it away north
a short cut to mushrooms 115 over there. It goes round the north end of the Marish so as tostrikethecausewayfromthe Bridgeabove Stock.Butthat is miles out of the way. We could save a quarter of the distanceifwemadealineforthe Ferryfromwherewestand.’ ‘Short cuts make long delays,’ argued Pippin. ‘The country is rough round here, and there are bogs and all kinds of difficulties down in the Marish – I know the land in these parts. And if you are worrying about Black Riders, I can’t see that it is any worse meeting them on a road than in a wood or a field.’ ‘It is less easy to find people in the woods and fields,’ answered Frodo.‘Andifyouaresupposedtobeontheroad, there is some chance that you will be looked for on the road and not off it.’ ‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘I will follow you into every bog andditch.Butitishard!Ihadcountedonpassingthe Golden Perch at Stock before sundown. The best beer in the East- farthing, or used to be: it is a long time since I tasted it.’ ‘That settles it!’ said Frodo. ‘Short cuts make delays, but inns make longer ones. At all costs we must keep you away from the Golden Perch. We want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?’ ‘I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam (in spite of private misgivings and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing). ‘Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let’s go now!’ said Pippin. It was already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds were beginning to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain. The hobbits scrambled down a steep green bank and plunged into the thick trees below. Theircoursehadbeenchosentoleave Woodhalltotheirleft, and to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side of the hills, until they reached the flats beyond. Then they could make straight for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches and fences.
116 the fellowship of the ring Frodoreckonedtheyhadeighteenmilestogoinastraightline. Hesoonfoundthatthethicketwascloserandmoretangled than it had appeared. There were no paths in the under- growth, and they did not get on very fast. When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a stream runningdownfromthehillsbehindinadeeplydugbedwith steep slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most incon- veniently it cut across the line they had chosen. They could notjumpoverit,norindeedgetacrossitatallwithoutgetting wet,scratched, andmuddy. Theyhalted, wonderingwhat to do. ‘First check!’ said Pippin, smiling grimly. Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the trees he caught a glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down. ‘Look!’ he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all looked, and on the edge high above them they saw against the sky a horse standing. Beside it stooped a black figure. They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led theway,andplungedquicklyintothethickbushesbesidethe stream.‘Whew!’hesaidto Pippin.‘Wewerebothright!The short cut has gone crooked already; but we got under cover only just in time. You’ve got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear anything coming?’ They stood still, almost holding their breath as they listened; but there was no sound of pursuit. ‘I don’t fancy he would try bringing his horse down that bank,’ said Sam. ‘But I guess he knows we came down it. We had better be going on.’ Goingonwasnotaltogethereasy.Theyhadpackstocarry, and the bushes and brambles were reluctant to let them through. They were cut off from the wind by the ridge behind, and the air was still and stuffy. When they forced their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tiredandveryscratched,andtheywerealsonolongercertain of the direction in which they were going. The banks of the streamsank,asitreachedthelevelsandbecamebroaderand shallower, wandering off towards the Marish and the River.
a short cut to mushrooms 117 ‘Why,thisisthe Stock-brook!’said Pippin.‘Ifwearegoing to try and get back on to our course, we must cross at once and bear right.’ They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown and treeless, on the further side. Beyond that they came again to a belt of trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here and there an elm tree or an ash. The ground was fairly level, and there was little undergrowth; but the trees were too close for them to see far ahead. The leaves blew upwards in sudden gusts of wind, and spots of rain begantofallfromtheovercastsky.Thenthewinddiedaway and the rain came streaming down. They trudged along as fast as they could, over patches of grass, and through thick drifts of old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered and trickled.Theydidnottalk,butkeptglancingback,andfrom side to side. Afterhalfanhour Pippinsaid:‘Ihopewehavenotturned too much towards the south, and are not walking longwise throughthiswood!Itisnotaverybroadbelt–Ishouldhave said no more than a mile at the widest – and we ought to have been through it by now.’ ‘It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,’ said Frodo. ‘That won’t mend matters. Let us keep on as we are going! I am not sure that I want to come out into the open yet.’ They went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun gleamed out of ragged clouds again and the rain lessened. It was now past mid-day, and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its leaves though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the ground at itsfeetwasfairlydryandsheltered.Whentheycametomake their meal, they found that the Elves had filled their bottles with a clear drink, pale golden in colour: it had the scent of ahoneymadeofmanyflowers,andwaswonderfullyrefresh- ing.Verysoontheywerelaughing,andsnappingtheirfingers at rain, and at Black Riders. The last few miles, they felt, would soon be behind them.
118 the fellowship of the ring Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly: Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go To heal my heart and drown my woe. Rain may fall and wind may blow, And many miles be still to go, But under a tall tree I will lie, And let the clouds go sailing by. Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came down the wind, like the cry of some evil and lonely creature. It rose and fell, and ended on a high piercing note. Even as they sat and stood, as if suddenly frozen, it was answered by anothercry,fainterandfurtheroff,butnolesschillingtothe blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in the leaves. ‘And what do you think that was?’ Pippin asked at last, tryingtospeaklightly, butquaveringalittle.‘Ifit wasabird, it was one that I never heard in the Shire before.’ ‘It was not bird or beast,’ said Frodo. ‘It was a call, or a signal – there were words in that cry, though I could not catch them. But no hobbit has such a voice.’ No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but no one spoke of them. They were now reluctant eithertostayorgoon;butsoonerorlatertheyhadgottoget across the open country to the Ferry, and it was best to go sooner and in daylight. In a few moments they had shoul- dered their packs again and were off. Before long the wood came to a sudden end. Wide grass- landsstretchedbeforethem.Theynowsawthattheyhad,in fact, turned too much to the south. Away over the flats they could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury across the River, butitwasnowtotheirleft.Creepingcautiouslyoutfromthe
a short cut to mushrooms 119 edge of the trees, they set off across the open as quickly as they could. Atfirsttheyfelt afraid,awayfromtheshelterof thewood. Far back behind them stood the high place where they had breakfasted. Frodo half expected to see the small distant figure of a horseman on the ridge dark against the sky; but therewasnosignofone.Thesunescapingfromthebreaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining brightly again. Their fear left them, though they still felt uneasy. But the land became steadily more tame and well-ordered. Soon they came into well-tended fields and meadows:therewerehedgesandgatesanddikesfordrainage. Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an ordinary corner of the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The line of the River grew nearer; and the Black Riders began to seem like phantoms of the woods now left far behind. They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and cametoastoutgate.Beyonditaruttedlaneranbetweenlow well-laid hedges towards a distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped. ‘I know these fields and this gate!’ he said. ‘This is Bam- furlong, old Farmer Maggot’s land. That’s his farm away there in the trees.’ ‘One trouble after another!’ said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed as if Pippin had declared the lane was the slot leading to a dragon’s den. The others looked at him in surprise. ‘What’s wrong with old Maggot?’ asked Pippin. ‘He’s a good friend to all the Brandybucks. Of course he’s a terror to trespassers, and keeps ferocious dogs – but after all, folk down here are near the border and have to be more on their guard.’ ‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘But all the same,’ he added with a shamefacedlaugh,‘Iamterrifiedofhimandhisdogs.Ihave avoided his farm for years and years. He caught me several times trespassing after mushrooms, when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat me, and then
120 the fellowship of the ring took me and showed me to his dogs. ‘‘See, lads,’’ he said, ‘‘next time this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can eat him. Now see him off!’’ They chased me all the way to the Ferry.Ihavenevergotoverthefright–though Idaresay the beasts knew their business and would not really have touched me.’ Pippin laughed. ‘Well, it’s time you made it up. Especially if you are coming back to live in Buckland. Old Maggot is reallyastoutfellow–ifyouleavehismushroomsalone.Let’s get into the lane and then we shan’t be trespassing. If we meet him, I’ll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry’s, and I used to come here with him a good deal at one time.’ Theywentalongthelane,untiltheysawthethatchedroofs of a large house and farm-buildings peeping out among the trees ahead. The Maggots, and the Puddifoots of Stock, and most of the inhabitants of the Marish, were house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall all round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the wall into the lane. Suddenlyastheydrewneareraterrificbayingandbarking brokeout,andaloudvoicewasheardshouting:‘Grip!Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!’ Frodoand Samstoppeddead,but Pippinwalkedonafew paces. The gate opened and three huge dogs came pelting out into the lane, and dashed towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but Sam shrank against the wall, while two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and mostferociousofthethreehaltedinfrontof Frodo,bristling and growling. Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick-set hobbit with a round red face. ‘Hallo! Hallo! And who may you be, and what may you be wanting?’ he asked. ‘Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!’ said Pippin. The farmer looked at him closely. ‘Well, if it isn’t Master Pippin–Mr.Peregrin Took,Ishouldsay!’hecried,changing
a short cut to mushrooms 121 fromascowltoagrin.‘It’salongtimesince Isawyouround here. It’s lucky for you that I know you. I was just going out tosetmydogsonanystrangers.Therearesomefunnythings going on today. Of course, we do get queer folk wandering in these parts at times. Too near the River,’ he said, shaking hishead.‘Butthisfellowwasthemostoutlandish Ihaveever set eyes on. He won’t cross my land without leave a second time, not if I can stop it.’ ‘What fellow do you mean?’ asked Pippin. ‘Then you haven’t seen him?’ said the farmer. ‘He went up the lane towards the causeway not a long while back. He was a funny customer and asking funny questions. But per- haps you’ll come along inside, and we’ll pass the news more comfortable. I’ve a drop of good ale on tap, if you and your friends are willing, Mr. Took.’ It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do it in his own time and fashion, so they all accepted the invitation. ‘What about the dogs?’ asked Frodo anxiously. The farmer laughed. ‘They won’t harm you – not unless I tell ’em to. Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!’ he cried. ‘Heel, Wolf!’ To the relief of Frodo and Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free. Pippinintroducedtheothertwotothefarmer.‘Mr.Frodo Baggins,’ he said. ‘You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall.’ At the name Baggins the farmer started,andgave Frodoasharpglance.Foramoment Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and that the dogs would be told to see him off. But Farmer Maggot took him by the arm. ‘Well, if that isn’t queerer than ever!’ he exclaimed. ‘Mr. Baggins is it? Come inside! We must have a talk.’ They went into the farmer’s kitchen, and sat by the wide fire-place. Mrs. Maggot brought out beer in a huge jug, and filledfour largemugs. Itwasa goodbrew,and Pippinfound himselfmorethancompensatedformissingthe Golden Perch. Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural mistrust
122 the fellowship of the ring oftheinhabitantsofotherpartsofthe Shire;andalsohewas notdisposedtobequickfriendswithanyonewhohadbeaten his master, however long ago. Afterafewremarksabouttheweatherandtheagricultural prospects(whichwerenoworsethanusual),Farmer Maggot put down his mug and looked at them all in turn. ‘Now,Mr.Peregrin,’hesaid,‘wheremightyoubecoming from, and where might you be going to? Were you coming to visit me? For, if so, you had gone past my gate without my seeing you.’ ‘Well, no,’ answered Pippin. ‘To tell you the truth, since youhave guessedit,we gotintothe lanefromthe otherend: wehadcomeoveryourfields.Butthatwasquitebyaccident. Welostourwayinthewoods,backnear Woodhall,tryingto take a short cut to the Ferry.’ ‘If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you better,’ said the farmer. ‘But I wasn’t worrying about that. You have leave to walk over my land, if you have a mind, Mr. Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins – though I daresay you still like mushrooms.’ He laughed. ‘Ah yes, I recognized the name. I recollect the time when young Frodo Baggins was one of the worst young rascals of Buckland. But it wasn’t mushrooms I was thinking of. I had just heard the name Bagginsbeforeyouturnedup.Whatdoyouthinkthatfunny customer asked me?’ Theywaitedanxiouslyforhimtogoon.‘Well,’thefarmer continued, approaching his point with slow relish, ‘he came ridingon abig blackhorse inatthe gate,which happenedto be open, and right up to my door. All black he was himself, too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want to be known. ‘‘Now what in the Shire can he want?’’ I thought to myself. We don’t see many of the Big Folk over the border; and anyway I had never heard of any like this black fellow. ‘‘‘Good-day to you!’’ I says, going out to him. ‘‘This lane don’t lead anywhere, and wherever you may be going, your quickest way will be back to the road.’’ I didn’t like the looks of him; and when Grip came out, he took one sniff and let
a short cut to mushrooms 123 out a yelp as if he had been stung: he put down his tail and bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still. ‘‘‘I come from yonder,’’ he said, slow and stiff-like, pointing back west, over my fields, if you please. ‘‘Have you seen Baggins?’’ he asked in a queer voice, and bent down towards me. I could not see any face, for his hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down my back. But I did not see why he should come riding over my land so bold. ‘‘‘Beoff!’’Isaid.‘‘Thereareno Bagginseshere.You’rein the wrong part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton – but you can go by road this time.’’ ‘‘‘Baggins has left,’’ he answered in a whisper. ‘‘He is coming. He is not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come back with gold.’’ ‘‘‘No you won’t,’’ I said. ‘‘You’ll go back where you belong, double quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs.’’ ‘He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might not. Then he spurred his great horse right at me, and I jumped out of the way only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the gate and up the lane towards the causeway like a bolt of thunder. What do you think of that?’ Frodo sat for a moment looking at the fire, but his only thought was how on earth would they reach the Ferry. ‘I don’t know what to think,’ he said at last. ‘Then I’lltellyouwhattothink,’said Maggot.‘Youshould neverhavegonemixingyourselfupwith Hobbitonfolk,Mr. Frodo.Folkarequeerupthere.’Samstirredinhischair,and looked at the farmer with an unfriendly eye. ‘But you were alwaysarecklesslad.When Iheardyouhadleftthe Brandy- bucksandgoneofftothatold Mr.Bilbo,Isaidthatyouwere goingtofindtrouble.Markmywords,thisallcomesofthose strange doings of Mr. Bilbo’s. His money was got in some strange fashion in foreign parts, they say. Maybe there is some that want to know what has become of the gold and jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?’
124 the fellowship of the ring Frodosaidnothing:theshrewdguessesofthefarmerwere rather disconcerting. ‘Well, Mr. Frodo,’ Maggot went on, ‘I’m glad that you’ve had the sense to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay there! And don’t get mixed up with these outlandish folk. You’llhavefriendsintheseparts.Ifanyoftheseblackfellows comeafteryouagain,I’lldealwiththem.I’llsayyou’redead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might betrueenough;foraslikeasnotitisold Mr.Bilbotheywant news of.’ ‘Maybeyou’reright,’said Frodo,avoidingthefarmer’seye and staring at the fire. Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. ‘Well, I see you have ideas of your own,’ he said. ‘It is as plain as my nose that no accident brought you and that rider here on the same after- noon; and maybe my news was no great news to you, after all. I am not asking you to tell me anything you have a mind tokeeptoyourself;but Iseeyouareinsomekindoftrouble. Perhaps you are thinking it won’t be too easy to get to the Ferry without being caught?’ ‘Iwasthinkingso,’said Frodo.‘Butwehavegottotryand get there; and it won’t be done by sitting and thinking. So I am afraid we must be going. Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I’ve been in terror of you and your dogs foroverthirtyyears,Farmer Maggot,thoughyoumaylaugh to hear it. It’s a pity: for I’ve missed a good friend. And now I’m sorry to leave so soon. But I’ll come back, perhaps, one day – if I get a chance.’ ‘You’ll be welcome when you come,’ said Maggot. ‘But now I’ve a notion. It’s near sundown already, and we are goingtohaveoursupper;forwemostlygotobedsoonafter the Sun.Ifyouand Mr.Peregrinandallcouldstayandhave a bite with us, we would be pleased!’ ‘And so should we!’ said Frodo. ‘But we must be going at once, I’m afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.’ ‘Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of
a short cut to mushrooms 125 supper, I’ll get out a small waggon, and I’ll drive you all to the Ferry. That will save you a good step, and it might also save you trouble of another sort.’ Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin and Sam. Thesun was already behind the western hills,andthelightwasfailing.Twoof Maggot’ssonsandhis three daughters came in, and a generous supper was laid on the large table. The kitchen was lit with candles and the fire was mended. Mrs. Maggot bustled in and out. One or two other hobbits belonging to the farm-household came in. In a short while fourteen sat down to eat. There was beer in plenty, and a mighty dish of mushrooms and bacon, besides much other solid farmhouse fare. The dogs lay by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones. When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lantern and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out. They threw their packs on boardandclimbedin.Thefarmersatinthedriving-seat,and whipped up his two stout ponies. His wife stood in the light of the open door. ‘Youbecarefulofyourself,Maggot!’shecalled.‘Don’tgo arguing with any foreigners, and come straight back!’ ‘I will!’ said he, and drove out of the gate. There was now no breath of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air. They went without lights and took it slowly. After a mile or two the lane came to an end, crossing a deep dike, and climbing a short slope up on to the high- banked causeway. Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north and south, but nothing could be seen in the darkness, and therewasnotasoundinthestillair.Thinstrandsofriver-mist were hanging above the dikes, and crawling over the fields. ‘It’s going to be thick,’ said Maggot; ‘but I’ll not light my lanterns till I turn for home. We’ll hear anything on the road long before we meet it tonight.’ * * *
126 the fellowship of the ring It was five miles or more from Maggot’s lane to the Ferry. The hobbits wrapped themselves up, but their ears were strainedforanysoundabovethecreakofthewheelsandthe slow clop of the ponies’ hoofs. The waggon seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him Pippin was nodding towards sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog. They reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked by two tall white posts that suddenly loomed up on theirright.Farmer Maggotdrewinhisponiesandthewaggon creaked to a halt. They were just beginning to scramble out, when suddenly they heard what they had all been dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them. Maggotjumpeddownandstoodholdingtheponies’heads, andpeeringforwardintothegloom.Clip-clop,clip-clopcame the approaching rider. The fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air. ‘You’d better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam anxiously. ‘You get down in the waggon and cover up with blankets, and we’ll send this rider to the rightabouts!’ He climbed out and went to the farmer’s side. Black Riders would have to ride over him to get near the waggon. Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them. ‘Hallothere!’called Farmer Maggot.Theadvancinghoofs stopped short. They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist, a yard or two ahead. ‘Nowthen!’saidthefarmer,throwingthereinsto Samand striding forward. ‘Don’t you come a step nearer! What do you want, and where are you going?’ ‘I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?’ said a muffled voice – but the voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. A darklanternwasuncovered,anditslightfellontheastonished face of the farmer. ‘Mr. Merry!’ he cried. ‘Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?’ said Merry coming forward. As he came out of the mist and their fears
a short cut to mushrooms 127 subsided,heseemedsuddenlytodiminishtoordinaryhobbit- size. He was riding a pony, and a scarf was swathed round his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog. Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. ‘So there you are at last!’ said Merry. ‘I was beginning to wonder if you would turn up at all today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across and rode up towards Stocktoseeifyouhadfalleninanyditches.But I’m blest if I know which way you have come. Where did you find them, Mr. Maggot? In your duck-pond?’ ‘No,Icaught’emtrespassing,’saidthefarmer,‘andnearly set my dogs on ’em; but they’ll tell you all the story, I’ve no doubt. Now, if you’ll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and all, I’d best be turning for home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick.’ He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. ‘Well, goodnighttoyouall,’ hesaid.‘It’sbeenaqueerday,andno mistake.Butall’swellasendswell;thoughperhapsweshould not say that until we reach our own doors. I’ll not deny that I’ll be glad now when I do.’ He lit his lanterns, and got up. Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat. ‘I was nearly forgetting,’ he said. ‘Mrs. Maggot put this up for Mr.Baggins,withhercompliments.’Hehandeditdownand moved off, followed by a chorus of thanks and good-nights. They watched the pale rings of light round his lanterns as theydwindledintothefoggynight.Suddenly Frodolaughed: from the covered basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising.
Chapter 5 A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED ‘Nowwehadbettergethomeourselves,’said Merry.‘There’s something funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.’ They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept and edged with large white-washed stones. In a hundredyardsorsoitbroughtthemtotheriver-bank,where there was a broad wooden landing-stage. A large flat ferry- boat was moored beside it. The white bollards near the water’s edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts.Behindthemthemistsintheflatfieldswerenowabove the hedges; but the water before them was dark, with only a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by the bank. There seemed to be less fog on the further side. Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, and theothersfollowed.Merrythenpushedslowlyoffwithalong pole. The Brandywine flowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank was steep, and up it a winding pathclimbedfromthefurtherlanding.Lampsweretwinkling there.Behindloomedupthe Buck Hill;andoutofit,through stray shrouds of mist, shone many round windows, yellow andred.Theywerethewindowsof Brandy Hall,theancient home of the Brandybucks. Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family,oneoftheoldestinthe Marishorindeedinthe Shire, had crossed the river, which was the original boundary of the land eastwards. He built (and excavated) Brandy Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck, and settled down to become master of what was virtually a small independent country. His family grew and grew, and after his days con-
a conspiracy unmasked 129 tinued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of the low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors, and about a hundred windows. The Brandybucks and their numerous dependants then began to burrow, and later to build, all round about. That was the origin of Buckland, a thicklyinhabitedstripbetweentheriverandthe Old Forest,a sortofcolonyfromthe Shire.Itschiefvillagewas Bucklebury, clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall. The people in the Marish were friendly with the Buck- landers, and the authority of the Master of the Hall (as the headofthe Brandybuckfamilywascalled)wasstillacknowl- edged by the farmers between Stock and Rushey. But most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar, half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter of fact, they were not very different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point: they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim. Their land was originally unprotected from the East; but on that side they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been planted many generations ago, and was now thick and tall, for it was constantly tended. It ran all the way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop curving away from the river, to Haysend (where the Withywindle flowed out of the Forestintothe Brandywine):wellovertwentymilesfromend to end. But, of course, it was not a complete protection. The Forest drew close to the hedge in many places. The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after dark, and that also was not usual in the Shire. The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buck- land shore drew nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river before. He had a strangefeelingastheslowgurglingstreamslippedby:hisold life lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratchedhishead,andforamomenthadapassingwishthat Mr. Frodo could have gone on living quietly at Bag End. The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it
130 the fellowship of the ring up, and Pippin was already leading the pony up the path, when Sam (whohad beenlooking back,asif totake farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper: ‘Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?’ On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just make out a figure: it looked like a dark black bundle left behind. But as they looked it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It then crawled, or went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps. ‘What in the Shire is that?’ exclaimed Merry. ‘Somethingthatisfollowingus,’said Frodo.‘Butdon’task any more now! Let’s get away at once!’ They hurried up the path to the top of the bank, but when they looked back the far shore was shrouded in mist, and nothing could be seen. ‘Thank goodness you don’t keep any boats on the west- bank!’ said Frodo. ‘Can horses cross the river?’ ‘They can go ten miles north to Brandywine Bridge – or they might swim,’ answered Merry. ‘Though I never heard of any horse swimming the Brandywine. But what have horses to do with it?’ ‘I’ll tell you later. Let’s get indoors and then we can talk.’ ‘All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I’ll just ride onandtell Fatty Bolgerthatyouarecoming.We’llseeabout supper and things.’ ‘We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,’ said Frodo; ‘but we could do with another.’ ‘You shall have it! Give me that basket!’ said Merry, and rode ahead into the darkness. Itwassomedistancefromthe Brandywineto Frodo’snew house at Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south from the Bridge. Halfamilenorthwardalongthistheycametoalaneopening on their right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it climbed up and down into the country. Atlasttheycametoanarrowgateinathickhedge.Nothing
a conspiracy unmasked 131 could be seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from thelaneinthemiddleofawidecircleoflawnsurroundedby a belt of low trees inside the outer hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of the country, and there were no other dwellings close by. You could get in and out without being noticed. It had been built alongwhilebeforebythe Brandybucks,fortheuseofguests, or members of the family that wished to escape from the crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an old- fashioned countrified house, as much like a hobbit-hole as possible: it was long and low, with no upper storey; and it had a roof of turf, round windows, and a large round door. As they walked up the green path from the gate no light was visible; the windows were dark and shuttered. Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty Bolger opened it. A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and shut them- selves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on either side; in front of them a passage ran back down the middle of the house. ‘Well, what do you think of it?’ asked Merry coming up the passage. ‘We have done our best in a short time to make it look like home. After all Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.’ Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his own favourite things – or Bilbo’s things (they reminded him sharplyofhimintheirnewsetting)–werearrangedasnearly as possible as they had been at Bag End. It was a pleasant, comfortable,welcomingplace;andhefoundhimselfwishing that he was really coming here to settle down in quiet retire- ment. It seemed unfair to have put his friends to all this trouble; and he wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave them so soon, indeed at once. Yet that would have to be done that very night, before they all went to bed. ‘It’s delightful!’ he said with an effort. ‘I hardly feel that I have moved at all.’ * * *
132 the fellowship of the ring Thetravellershunguptheircloaks,andpiledtheirpackson thefloor.Merryledthemdownthepassageandthrewopena dooratthefarend.Firelightcameout,andapuffofsteam. ‘A bath!’ cried Pippin. ‘O blessed Meriadoc!’ ‘Which order shall we go in?’ said Frodo. ‘Eldest first, or quickest first? You’ll be last either way, Master Peregrin.’ ‘Trust me to arrange things better than that!’ said Merry. ‘Wecan’tbeginlifeat Crickhollowwithaquarreloverbaths. Inthatroomtherearethreetubs,andacopperfullofboiling water. There are also towels, mats and soap. Get inside, and be quick!’ Merryand Fattywentintothekitchenontheothersideof thepassage,andbusiedthemselveswiththefinalpreparations for a late supper. Snatches of competing songs came from thebathroommixedwiththesoundofsplashingandwallow- ing. The voice of Pippin was suddenly lifted up above the others in one of Bilbo’s favourite bath-songs. Sing hey! for the bath at close of day that washes the weary mud away! A loon is he that will not sing: O! Water Hot is a noble thing! O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain, and the brook that leaps from hill to plain; but better than rain or rippling streams is Water Hot that smokes and steams. O! Water cold we may pour at need down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed; but better is Beer, if drink we lack, and Water Hot poured down the back. O! Water is fair that leaps on high in a fountain white beneath the sky; but never did fountain sound so sweet as splashing Hot Water with my feet!
a conspiracy unmasked 133 There was a terrific splash, and a shout of Whoa! from Frodo. It appeared that a lot of Pippin’s bath had imitated a fountain and leaped on high. Merry went to the door: ‘What about supper and beer in the throat?’ he called. Frodo came out drying his hair. ‘There’ssomuchwaterintheairthat I’mcomingintothe kitchen to finish,’ he said. ‘Lawks!’said Merry,lookingin.Thestonefloorwasswim- ming.‘Yououghttomopallthatupbeforeyougetanything toeat,Peregrin,’hesaid.‘Hurryup,orweshan’twaitforyou.’ They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. ‘I suppose you three won’t want mushrooms again?’ said Fredegar without much hope. ‘Yes we shall!’ cried Pippin. ‘They’remine!’said Frodo.‘Giventomeby Mrs.Maggot, a queen among farmers’ wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I’ll serve them.’ Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even the greediest likings of Big People. A fact which partly explains young Frodo’s long expeditions to the renowned fields of the Marish, and the wrath of the injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to hobbit standards. There were also many other things to fol- low, and when they had finished even Fatty Bolger heaved a sighofcontent.Theypushedbackthetable,anddrewchairs round the fire. ‘We’llclearuplater,’said Merry.‘Nowtellmeallaboutit! Iguessthatyouhavebeenhavingadventures,whichwasnot quite fair without me. I want a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with old Maggot, and whyhespoketomelikethat.Hesoundedalmostasifhewas scared, if that is possible.’ ‘We have all been scared,’ said Pippin after a pause, in which Frodostaredatthefireanddidnotspeak.‘Youwould havebeen,too,ifyouhadbeenchasedfortwodaysby Black Riders.’
134 the fellowship of the ring ‘And what are they?’ ‘Blackfiguresridingonblackhorses,’answered Pippin.‘If Frodo won’t talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.’Hethengaveafullaccountoftheirjourneyfrom thetimewhentheyleft Hobbiton.Samgavevarioussupport- ing nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent. ‘I should think you were making it all up,’ said Merry, ‘if I had not seen that black shape on the landing-stage – and heardthequeersoundin Maggot’svoice.Whatdoyoumake of it all, Frodo?’ ‘Cousin Frodo has been very close,’ said Pippin. ‘But the time has come for him to open out. So far we have been given nothing more to go on than Farmer Maggot’s guess that it has something to do with old Bilbo’s treasure.’ ‘That was only a guess,’ said Frodo hastily. ‘Maggot does not know anything.’ ‘Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,’ said Merry. ‘A lot goes on behind his round face that does not come out in his talk. I’veheardthatheusedtogointothe Old Forestatonetime, and he has the reputation of knowing a good many strange things. Butyou can atleast tell us,Frodo, whether youthink his guess good or bad.’ ‘Ithink,’answered Frodoslowly,‘thatitwasagoodguess, asfarasitgoes.Thereisaconnexionwith Bilbo’soldadven- tures, and the Riders are looking, or perhaps one ought to say searching, for him or for me. I also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not safe here or anywhere else.’ He looked round at the windows and walls, asifhewasafraidtheywouldsuddenlygiveway.Theothers looked at him in silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves. ‘It’s coming out in a minute,’ whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded. ‘Well!’ said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his back, as if he had made a decision. ‘I can’t keep it dark any longer. I have got something to tell you all.But I don’t know quite how to begin.’
a conspiracy unmasked 135 ‘I think I could help you,’ said Merry quietly, ‘by telling you some of it myself.’ ‘Whatdoyoumean?’said Frodo,lookingathimanxiously. ‘Just this, my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because youdon’tknowhowtosaygood-bye.Youmeanttoleavethe Shire,ofcourse.Butdangerhascomeonyousoonerthanyou expected,andnowyouaremakingupyourmindtogoatonce. And you don’t want to. We are very sorry for you.’ Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of surprise was so comical that they laughed. ‘Dear old Frodo!’ said Pippin. ‘Did you really think you had thrown dust in all our eyes?You havenot been nearlycareful orclever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying farewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We have constantly heard you muttering: ‘‘Shall I ever look down into that valley again, I wonder’’, and things like that. And pretendingthatyouhadcometotheendofyourmoney,and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those Sackville- Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.’ ‘Good heavens!’ said Frodo. ‘I thought I had been both careful and clever. I don’t know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire discussing my departure then?’ ‘Oh no!’ said Merry. ‘Don’t worry about that! The secret won’t keep for long, of course; but at present it is, I think, onlyknowntousconspirators.Afterall,youmustremember that we know you well, and are often with you. We can usually guess what you are thinking. I knew Bilbo, too. To tell you the truth, I have been watching you rather closely ever since he left. I thought you would go after him sooner or later; indeed I expected you to go sooner, and lately we have been very anxious. We have been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on your own likehedid.Eversincethisspringwehavekeptoureyesopen, and done a good deal of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape so easily!’ ‘But I must go,’ said Frodo. ‘It cannot be helped, dear friends. It is wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying
136 the fellowship of the ring tokeepme.Sinceyouhaveguessedsomuch,pleasehelpme and do not hinder me!’ ‘Youdonotunderstand!’said Pippin.‘Youmustgo–and therefore we must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Samisanexcellentfellow,andwouldjumpdownadragon’s throat to save you, if he did not trip over his own feet; but you will need more than one companion in your dangerous adventure.’ ‘My dear and most beloved hobbits!’ said Frodo deeply moved.‘But Icouldnotallowit.Idecidedthatlongago,too. You speak of danger, but you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt, no there-and-back journey. I am flying from deadly peril into deadly peril.’ ‘Of course we understand,’ said Merry firmly. ‘That is why we have decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; butwe aregoing todo ourbest tohelp you against the Enemy.’ ‘The Ring!’ said Frodo, now completely amazed. ‘Yes,the Ring,’said Merry.‘Mydearoldhobbit,youdon’t allow for the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about theexistenceofthe Ringforyears–before Bilbowentaway, infact;butsinceheobviouslyregardeditassecret,Ikeptthe knowledgeinmyhead,untilweformedourconspiracy.Idid not know Bilbo, of course, as well as I know you; I was too young, and he was also more careful – but he was not care- ful enough. If you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you.’ ‘Go on!’ said Frodo faintly. ‘Itwasthe Sackville-Bagginsesthatwerehisdownfall,asyou mightexpect.Oneday,ayearbeforethe Party,Ihappenedto bewalkingalongtheroad,when Isaw Bilboahead.Suddenly inthedistancethe S.-B.sappeared,comingtowardsus.Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he vanished. I was so startledthat I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary fashion; but I got through the hedge and walked along the field inside. I was peeping through into the road, afterthe S.-B.shadpassed,andwaslookingstraightat Bilbo
a conspiracy unmasked 137 when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of gold as he put something back in his trouser-pocket. ‘After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I spied. But you must admit that it was very intriguing, and I was only in my teens. I must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the old fellow’s secret book.’ ‘You have read his book!’ cried Frodo. ‘Good heavens above! Is nothing safe?’ ‘Not too safe, I should say,’ said Merry. ‘But I have only had one rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never leftthebookabout.Iwonderwhatbecameofit.Ishouldlike another look. Have you got it, Frodo?’ ‘No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.’ ‘Well,as Iwassaying,’Merryproceeded,‘Ikeptmyknow- ledgetomyself,tillthisspringwhenthingsgotserious.Then we formed our conspiracy; and as we were serious, too, and meant business, we have not been too scrupulous. You are notaveryeasynuttocrack,and Gandalfisworse.Butifyou wanttobeintroducedtoourchiefinvestigator,Icanproduce him.’ ‘Whereishe?’said Frodo,lookinground,asifheexpected a masked and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard. ‘Step forward, Sam!’ said Merry; and Sam stood up with a face scarlet up to the ears. ‘Here’s our collector of infor- mation! And he collected a lot, I can tell you, before he was finally caught. After which, I may say, he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up.’ ‘Sam!’ cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further, and quite unable to decide whether he felt angry, amused, relieved, or merely foolish. ‘Yes,sir!’said Sam.‘Beggingyourpardon,sir!But Imeant no wrong to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He has some sense, mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no! take someone as you can trust.’ ‘But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,’ said Frodo. Sam looked at him unhappily. ‘It all depends on what you
138 the fellowship of the ring want,’putin Merry.‘Youcantrustustosticktoyouthrough thick and thin – to the bitter end. And you can trust us to keep any secret of yours – closer than you keep it yourself. But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off without a word. We are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what Gandalf has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly afraid – but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.’ ‘And after all, sir,’ added Sam, ‘you did ought to take the Elves’ advice. Gildor said you should take them as was will- ing, and you can’t deny it.’ ‘Idon’tdenyit,’said Frodo,lookingat Sam,whowasnow grinning.‘Idon’tdenyit,but I’llneverbelieveyouaresleep- ing again, whether you snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure. ‘You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!’ he said, turning to theothers.‘Butblessyou!’helaughed,gettingupandwaving his arms, ‘I give in. I will take Gildor’s advice. If the danger were not so dark, I should dance for joy. Even so, I cannot help feeling happy; happier than I have felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.’ ‘Good!That’ssettled.Threecheersfor Captain Frodoand company!’theyshouted;andtheydancedroundhim.Merry and Pippin began a song, which they had apparently got ready for the occasion. It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on his adventure long ago, and went to the same tune: Farewell we call to hearth and hall! Though wind may blow and rain may fall, We must away ere break of day Far over wood and mountain tall. To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell In glades beneath the misty fell, Through moor and waste we ride in haste, And whither then we cannot tell.
a conspiracy unmasked 139 With foes ahead, behind us dread, Beneath the sky shall be our bed, Until at last our toil be passed, Our journey done, our errand sped. We must away! We must away! We ride before the break of day! ‘Verygood!’said Frodo.‘Butinthatcasetherearealotof things to do before we go to bed – under a roof, for tonight at any rate.’ ‘Oh! That was poetry!’ said Pippin. ‘Do you really mean to start before the break of day?’ ‘Idon’tknow,’answered Frodo.‘Ifearthose Black Riders, and Iamsureitisunsafetostayinoneplacelong,especially in a place to which it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to wait. But I should very much like to see Gandalf.Icouldseethateven Gildorwasdisturbedwhenhe heard that Gandalf had neverappeared. It really depends on two things. How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how soon could we get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.’ ‘The answer to the second question,’ said Merry, ‘is that wecouldgetoffinanhour.Ihavepreparedpracticallyevery- thing.Therearefiveponiesinastableacrossthefields;stores and tackle are all packed, except for a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.’ ‘It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy,’ said Frodo. ‘But what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?’ ‘That all depends on what you think the Riders would do, if they found you here,’ answered Merry. ‘They could have reached here by now, of course, if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the river- bank,justthissideofthe Bridge.Thegate-guardswouldnot letthemthroughbynight,thoughtheymightbreakthrough. Eveninthedaylighttheywouldtrytokeepthemout,Ithink,
140 the fellowship of the ring at anyrate until theygot a messagethrough to the Master of the Hall – for they would not like the look of the Riders, and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland cannot resist a determined attack for long. And it is possible that in the morning even a Black Rider that rode up and asked for Mr. Baggins would be let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back to live at Crickhollow.’ Frodo sat for a while in thought. ‘I have made up my mind,’ he said finally. ‘I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light.But Iam notgoing byroad: itwould be saferto wait here than that. If I go through the North-gate my departure from Bucklandwillbeknownatonce,insteadofbeingsecret for several days at least, as it might be. And what is more, the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will certainly be watched, whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. We don’t know how many there are; but there are at least two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is to go off in a quite unexpected direction.’ ‘But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!’ said Fredegar horrified. ‘You can’t be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as Black Riders.’ ‘Not quite,’ said Merry. ‘It sounds very desperate, but I believe Frodoisright.Itistheonlywayofgettingoffwithout beingfollowedatonce.Withluckwemightgetaconsiderable start.’ ‘But you won’t have any luck in the Old Forest,’ objected Fredegar. ‘No one ever has luck in there. You’ll get lost. People don’t go in there.’ ‘Oh yes they do!’ said Merry. ‘The Brandybucks go in – occasionally when the fit takes them. We have a private entrance.Frodowentinonce,longago.Ihavebeeninseveral times:usuallyindaylight,ofcourse,whenthetreesaresleepy and fairly quiet.’ ‘Well, do as you think best!’ said Fredegar. ‘I am more afraid of the Old Forest than of anything I know about: the
a conspiracy unmasked 141 stories about it are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as Iamnotgoingonthejourney.Still,Iamverygladsomeone isstoppingbehind,whocantell Gandalfwhatyouhavedone, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.’ Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire, nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine Bridge. His task, according to the original plans of the conspirators, wastostaybehindanddealwithinquisitivefolk,andtokeep upaslongaspossiblethepretencethat Mr.Bagginswasstill living at Crickhollow. He had even brought along some old clothesof Frodo’stohelphiminplayingthepart.Theylittle thought how dangerous that part might prove. ‘Excellent!’said Frodo,whenheunderstoodtheplan.‘We could not have left any message behind for Gandalf other- wise. I don’t know whether these Riders can read or not, of course,but Ishouldnothavedaredtoriskawrittenmessage, in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty is willingtoholdthefort,and Icanbesureof Gandalfknowing the way we have gone, that decides me. I am going into the Old Forest first thing tomorrow.’ ‘Well,that’sthat,’said Pippin.‘Onthewhole Iwouldrather have our job than Fatty’s – waiting here till Black Riders come.’ ‘Youwaittillyouarewellinsidethe Forest,’said Fredegar. ‘You’ll wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.’ ‘It’s no good arguing about it any more,’ said Merry. ‘We have still got to tidy up and put the finishing touches to the packing, before we get to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.’ When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for sometime.Hislegsached. Hewasgladthathewasridingin themorning. Eventuallyhe fellintoa vaguedream,in which he seemed to be looking out of a high window over a dark
142 the fellowship of the ring sea of tangled trees. Down below among the roots there was the sound of creatures crawling and snuffling. He felt sure they would smell him out sooner or later. Then he heard a noise in the distance. At first he thought itwasagreatwindcomingovertheleavesoftheforest.Then he knew that it was not leaves, but the sound of the Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in waking life, though it had often troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on a dark heath, and there was a strange salt smell in the air. Looking up he saw before him a tall white tower, standing aloneon ahigh ridge.A greatdesire cameover himto climb thetowerandseethe Sea.Hestartedtostruggleuptheridge towards the tower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and there was a noise of thunder.
Chapter 6 THE OLD FOREST Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry was standing there with a candle in one hand, and banging onthedoorwiththeother.‘Allright!Whatisit?’said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered. ‘Whatisit!’cried Merry.‘Itistimetogetup.Itishalfpast fourandveryfoggy.Comeon!Samisalreadygettingbreakfast ready.Even Pippinisup.Iamjustgoingtosaddletheponies, andfetchtheonethatistobethebaggage-carrier.Wakethat sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up and see us off.’ Soon after six o’clock the five hobbits were ready to start. Fatty Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path that went through a spinney behind the house, and then cut across several fields. The leaves of trees were glistening, and every twig was dripping; the grass was greywithcolddew.Everythingwasstill,andfar-awaynoises seemed near and clear: fowls chattering in a yard, someone closing a door of a distant house. In their shed they found the ponies: sturdy little beasts of the kind loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long day’s work. They mounted, and soon they were riding off into the mist, which seemed to open reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for about an hour, slowly and without talking, they saw the Hedge looming suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over with silver cobwebs. ‘How are you going to get through this?’ asked Fredegar. ‘Follow me!’ said Merry, ‘and you will see.’ He turned to theleftalongthe Hedge,andsoontheycametoapointwhere it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A cutting
144 the fellowship of the ring had been made, at some distance from the Hedge, and went sloping gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at thesides,whichrosesteadily,untilsuddenlytheyarchedover and formed a tunnel that dived deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side. Here Fatty Bolger halted. ‘Good-bye, Frodo!’ he said. ‘I wishyouwerenotgoingintothe Forest.Ionlyhopeyouwill notneedrescuingbeforethedayisout.Butgoodlucktoyou – today and every day!’ ‘If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be lucky,’ said Frodo. ‘Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we shall soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.’ ‘Good-bye!’ they cried, and rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar’s sight into the tunnel. It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a gateofthick-setironbars.Merrygotdownandunlockedthe gate, and when they had all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock clicked. The sound was ominous. ‘There!’said Merry.‘You haveleftthe Shire,andare now outside, and on the edge of the Old Forest.’ ‘Are the stories about it true?’ asked Pippin. ‘Idon’tknowwhatstoriesyoumean,’Merryanswered.‘If you mean the old bogey-stories Fatty’s nurses used to tell him, about goblins and wolves and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I don’t believe them. But the Forest is queer. Everything in it is very much more alive, more aware of what is going on, so to speak, than things are in the Shire. And the trees do not like strangers. They watch you. They are usually content merely to watch you, as long as daylight lasts, and don’t do much. Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out, or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at night things can be most alarming, or so I am told. I have only once or twice been in here after dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the trees were whispering to each other, passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language; and the
the old forest 145 branchesswayedandgropedwithoutanywind.Theydosay the trees do actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In fact long ago they attacked the Hedge: they came and planted themselves right by it, and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and madeagreatbonfireinthe Forest,andburnedalltheground in a longstrip east of the Hedge. After that thetrees gave up the attack, but they became very unfriendly. There is still a wide bare space not far inside where the bonfire was made.’ ‘Is it only the trees that are dangerous?’ asked Pippin. ‘There are various queer things living deep in the Forest, and on the far side,’ said Merry, ‘or at least I have heard so; but I have never seen any of them. But something makes paths.Wheneveronecomesinsideonefindsopentracks;but they seem to shift and change from time to time in a queer fashion. Not far from this tunnel there is, or was for a long time, the beginning of quite a broad path leading to the Bonfire Glade,andthenonmoreorlessinourdirection,east andalittlenorth.Thatisthepath Iamgoingtotryandfind.’ The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the wide hollow. On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, a hundred yards and more beyond the Hedge; but it vanished as soon as it brought them under the trees. Looking back they could see the dark line of the Hedge through the stems of trees that were already thick about them. Looking ahead they could see only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes and shapes: straight or bent, twisted, leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched; and all the stems were green or grey with moss and slimy, shaggy growths. Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. ‘You had better lead on and find that path,’ Frodo said to him. ‘Don’t let us lose one another, or forget which way the Hedge lies!’ They picked a way among the trees, and their ponies plodded along, carefully avoiding the many writhing and interlacing roots. There was no undergrowth. The ground
146 the fellowship of the ring was rising steadily, and as they went forward it seemed that the trees became taller, darker, and thicker. There was no sound, except an occasional drip of moisture falling through the still leaves. For the moment there was no whispering or movement among the branches; but they all got an uncom- fortable feeling that they were being watched with dis- approval, deepening to dislike and even enmity. The feeling steadilygrew,untiltheyfoundthemselveslookingupquickly, or glancing back over their shoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow. There was not as yet any sign of a path, and the trees seemedconstantlytobartheirway.Pippinsuddenlyfeltthat he could not bear it any longer, and without warning let out a shout. ‘Oi! Oi!’ he cried. ‘I am not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will you!’ The others halted startled; but the cry fell as if muffled by a heavy curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood seemed to become more crowded and more watchful than before. ‘I should not shout, if I were you,’ said Merry. ‘It does more harm than good.’ Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, and if he had been right to make the others come into this abominable wood. Merry was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go. Pippin noticedit.‘Ithasnottakenyoulongtoloseus,’hesaid.Butat thatmoment Merrygaveawhistleofreliefandpointedahead. ‘Well, well!’ he said. ‘These trees do shift. There is the Bonfire Gladeinfront ofus(or Ihopeso), butthepathtoit seems to have moved away!’ Thelightgrewclearerastheywentforward.Suddenlythey cameoutofthetreesandfoundthemselvesinawidecircular space. There was sky above them, blue and clear to their surprise, for down under the Forest-roof they had not been abletoseetherisingmorningandtheliftingofthemist.The sun was not, however, high enough yet to shine down into
the old forest 147 theclearing,thoughitslightwasonthetree-tops.Theleaves were all thicker and greener about the edges of the glade, enclosing it with an almost solid wall. No tree grew there, onlyroughgrassandmanytallplants:stalkyandfadedhem- locks and wood-parsley, fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes, and rampant nettles and thistles. A dreary place: but it seemedacharmingandcheerfulgardenaftertheclose Forest. The hobbits felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at thebroadeningdaylightinthesky.Atthefarsideoftheglade therewasabreakinthewalloftrees,andaclearpathbeyond it.Theycouldseeitrunningonintothewood,wideinplaces and open above, though every now and again the trees drew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path theyrode.Theywerestillclimbinggently,buttheynowwent much quicker, and with better heart; for it seemed to them that the Forest had relented, and was going to let them pass unhindered after all. But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy. The treesdrewcloseagainoneitherside,andtheycouldnolonger see far ahead. Now stronger than ever they felt again the ill will of the wood pressing on them. So silent was it that the fall of their ponies’ hoofs, rustling on dead leaves and occasionally stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud in their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank to a murmur. O! Wanderers in the shadowed land despair not! For though dark they stand, all woods there be must end at last, and see the open sun go past: the setting sun, the rising sun, the day’s end, or the day begun. For east or west all woods must fail... Fail–evenashesaidthewordhisvoicefadedintosilence. The air seemed heavy and the making of words wearisome. Justbehindthemalargebranchfellfromanoldoverhanging
148 the fellowship of the ring tree with a crash into the path. The trees seemed to close in before them. ‘They do not like all that about ending and failing,’ said Merry.‘Ishouldnotsinganymoreatpresent.Waittillwedo get to the edge, and then we’ll turn and give them a rousing chorus!’ Hespokecheerfully,andifhefeltanygreatanxiety,hedid notshowit.Theothersdidnotanswer.Theyweredepressed. A heavy weight was settling steadily on Frodo’s heart, and he regretted now with every step forward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace of the trees. He was, indeed, just about to stop and propose going back (if that was still possible), when things took a new turn. The path stopped climbing, and became for a while nearly level. The darktreesdrewaside,andaheadtheycouldseethepathgoing almost straight forward. Before them, but some distance off, there stood a green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald head out of the encircling wood. The path seemed to be making directly for it. They now hurried forward again, delighted with the thought of climbing out for a while above the roof of the Forest. The path dipped, and then again began to climb upwards,leadingthematlasttothefootofthesteephillside. Thereitleftthetreesandfadedintotheturf.Thewoodstood all round the hill like thick hair that ended sharply in a circle round a shaven crown. Thehobbitsledtheirponiesup,windingroundandround untiltheyreachedthetop.Theretheystoodandgazedabout them. The air was gleaming and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near at hand the mist wasnowalmostgone;thoughhereandthereitlayinhollows of the wood, and to the south of them, out of a deep fold cutting right across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke. ‘That,’said Merry,pointing withhis hand,‘that isthe line of the Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and
the old forest 149 flows south-west through the midst of the Forest to join the Brandywine below Haysend. We don’t want to go that way! The Withywindle valley is said to be the queerest part of the wholewood–thecentrefromwhichallthequeernesscomes, as it were.’ Theotherslookedinthedirectionthat Merrypointedout, buttheycouldseelittlebutmistsoverthedampanddeep-cut valley; and beyond it the southern half of the Forest faded from view. The sun on the hill-top was now getting hot. It must have been about eleven o’clock; but the autumn haze still pre- vented them from seeing much in other directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of the Hedge or the valley of the Brandywine beyond it. Northward, where theylookedmosthopefully,theycouldseenothingthatmight be the line of the great East Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea of trees, and the horizon was veiled. On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as if the slopes of the hill were continued far down under the trees,likeisland-shoresthatreallyarethesidesofamountain rising out of deep waters. They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below them, while they ate their mid-day meal. As the sun rose and passed noon they glimpsedfaroffintheeastthegrey-greenlinesofthe Downs that lay beyond the Old Forest on that side. That cheered themgreatly;foritwasgoodtoseeasightofanythingbeyond thewood’sborders,thoughtheydidnotmeantogothatway, if they could help it: the Barrow-downs had as sinister a reputation in hobbit-legend as the Forest itself. Atlengththeymadeuptheirmindstogoonagain.Thepath that had brought them to the hill reappeared on the north- wardside;buttheyhadnotfolloweditfarbeforetheybecame aware thatit was bending steadilyto the right.Soon it began to descend rapidly and they guessed that it must actually be heading towards the Withywindle valley: not at all the
150 the fellowship of the ring direction they wished to take. After some discussion they decided to leave this misleading path and strike northward; foralthoughtheyhadnotbeenabletoseeitfromthehill-top, the Road must lie that way, and it could not be many miles off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed to be drier and more open, climbing up to slopes where the trees were thinner, and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes and other strange and nameless trees of the denser wood. At first their choice seemed to be good: they got along at a fair speed, though whenever they got a glimpse of the sun in an open glade they seemed unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But after a time the trees began to close in again, just where they had appeared from a distance to be thinner and less tangled. Then deep folds in the ground were dis- covered unexpectedly, like the ruts of great giant-wheels or wide moats and sunken roads long disused and choked with brambles. These lay usually right across their line of march, andcouldonlybecrossedbyscramblingdownandoutagain, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each timetheyclimbeddowntheyfoundthehollowfilledwiththick bushesandmattedundergrowth,whichsomehowwouldnot yield to the left, but only gave way when they turned to the right; and they had to go some distance along the bottom before they could find a way up the further bank. Each time theyclamberedout,thetreesseemeddeeperanddarker;and always to the left and upwards it was most difficult to find a way, and they were forced to the right and downwards. After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direc- tion,thoughtheyknewwellenoughthattheyhadlongceased togonorthwardatall.Theywerebeingheadedoff,andwere simply following a course chosen for them – eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it. Theafternoonwaswearingawaywhentheyscrambledand stumbledintoafoldthatwaswideranddeeperthananythey had yet met. It was so steep and overhung that it proved
the old forest 151 impossible to climb out of it again, either forwards or back- wards,withoutleavingtheirponiesandtheirbaggagebehind. All they could do was to follow the fold – downwards. The ground grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in thebanks,andsoontheyfoundthemselvesfollowingabrook that trickled and babbled through a weedy bed. Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully over-arched by trees high above them. Afterstumblingalongforsomewayalongthestream,they came quite suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before them. Coming to the opening they found that they had made their way down through a cleft in a high steep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a wide space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank almost as steep. A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy upon the hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark river of brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over with willows, blocked with fallen willows, and flecked with thousands of faded willow-leaves. The air was thick with them, fluttering yellow from the branches; for there was a warm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking. ‘Well, now I have at least some notion of where we are!’ said Merry. ‘We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.’ He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the long grasses. After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground between the cliff-foot and the river;insomeplacesfirmturfwentdowntothewater’sedge. ‘What’s more,’ he said, ‘there seems to be something like a footpath winding along on this side of the river. If we turn left and follow it, we shall be bound to come out on the east side of the Forest eventually.’ ‘I dare say!’ said Pippin. ‘That is, if the track goes on so
152 the fellowship of the ring far,anddoesnotsimplyleadusintoabogandleaveusthere. Who made the track, do you suppose, and why? I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting very suspicious of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe all the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we should have to go?’ ‘No,’ said Merry, ‘I haven’t. I don’t know in the least how far down the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly comehereoftenenoughtomakeapathalongit.Butthereis no other way out that I can see or think of.’ There being nothing else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reedsandgrasseswerelushandtall,inplacesfarabovetheir heads; but once found, the path was easy to follow, as it turned and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed over other rills, running down gullies into the Withywindle out of the higher forest-lands, and at these points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across. The hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies of all kinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoon sun was burning on their backs. At last they came suddenly into a thin shade; great grey branches reached across the path.Eachstepforwardbecamemorereluctantthanthelast. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their legs, and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes. Frodofelthischingodownandhisheadnod.Justinfront ofhim Pippinfellforwardontohisknees.Frodohalted.‘It’s nogood,’heheard Merrysaying.‘Can’tgoanotherstepwith- outrest.Musthavenap.It’scoolunderthewillows.Lessflies!’ Frodo did not like the sound of this. ‘Come on!’ he cried. ‘We can’t have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.’ But the others were too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly. Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His
the old forest 153 head swam. There now seemed hardly a sound in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing. Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing, a soft fluttering as of a song half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes and saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree, old and hoary. Enormous it looked, its sprawling branches going up like reaching arms with many long-fingered hands, its knotted andtwistedtrunkgapinginwidefissuresthatcreakedfaintly astheboughsmoved.Theleavesflutteringagainstthebright sky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell upon the grass. Merry and Pippin dragged themselves forward and lay down with their backs to the willow-trunk. Behind them the great cracks gaped wide to receive them as the tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their eyes, and then it seemed that they could almost hear words, cool words, saying something about water and sleep. They gavethemselvesuptothespellandfellfastasleepatthefoot of the great grey willow. Frodolayforawhilefightingwiththesleepthatwasover- powering him; then with an effort he struggled to his feet again. He felt a compelling desire for cool water. ‘Wait for me, Sam,’ he stammered. ‘Must bathe feet a minute.’ Halfinadreamhewanderedforwardtotheriverwardside of the tree, where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled dragonets straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feet in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back against the tree. Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern. He was worried. Theafternoon was getting late, and he thought this sudden sleepiness uncanny. ‘There’s more behind this than sun and warm air,’ he muttered to himself. ‘I don’t like this great big tree. I don’t trust it. Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won’t do at all!’
154 the fellowship of the ring Hepulledhimselftohisfeet,andstaggeredofftoseewhat had become of the ponies. He found that two had wandered on a good way along the path; and he had just caught them and brought them back towards the others, when he heard two noises; one loud, and the other soft but very clear. One was the splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast. He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to theedge, anda great tree-rootseemed tobe over himand holding him down, but he was not struggling. Sam gripped himbythejacket,anddraggedhimfromundertheroot;and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once he woke, and coughed and spluttered. ‘Do you know, Sam,’ he said at length, ‘the beastly tree threw me in! I felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!’ ‘Youwere dreaming Iexpect, Mr.Frodo,’said Sam.‘You shouldn’t sit in such a place, if you feel sleepy.’ ‘Whatabouttheothers?’Frodoasked.‘Iwonderwhatsort of dreams they are having.’ They went round to the other side of the tree, and then Sam understood the click that he had heard. Pippin had vanished.Thecrackbywhichhehadlaidhimselfhadclosed together, so that not a chink could be seen. Merry was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside, but the rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of which gripped like a pair of pincers. Frodoand Sambeatfirstuponthetree-trunkwhere Pippin hadlain.Theythenstruggledfranticallytopullopenthejaws of the crack that held poor Merry. It was quite useless. ‘Whatafoulthingtohappen!’cried Frodowildly.‘Whydid weevercomeintothisdreadful Forest?Iwishwewereallback at Crickhollow!’Hekickedthetreewithallhisstrength,heed- lessof his own feet. A hardly perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves rustled and whispered,butwithasoundnowoffaintandfar-offlaughter.
the old forest 155 ‘I suppose we haven’t got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?’ asked Sam. ‘I brought a little hatchet for chopping firewood,’ said Frodo. ‘That wouldn’t be much use.’ ‘Waitaminute!’cried Sam,struckbyanideasuggestedby firewood. ‘We might do something with fire!’ ‘We might,’ said Frodo doubtfully. ‘We might succeed in roasting Pippin alive inside.’ ‘We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,’ said Sam fiercely. ‘If it don’t let them go, I’ll have it down, if Ihavetognawit.’Herantotheponiesandbeforelongcame back with two tinder-boxes and a hatchet. Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of bark; and made a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These they heaped against the trunk on the far side of the tree from the prisoners. As soon as Sam had struck a spark into the tinder, it kindled the dry grass and a flurry of flame and smoke went up. The twigs crackled. Little fingers of fire licked against the dry scored rind of the ancient tree and scorched it. A tremor ran through the whole willow. The leaves seemed to hiss above their heads with a sound of pain and anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell. ‘Put it out! Put it out!’ cried Merry. ‘He’ll squeeze me in two, if you don’t. He says so!’ ‘Who? What?’ shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other side of the tree. ‘Putitout!Putitout!’begged Merry.Thebranchesofthe willow began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a windrisingandspreadingoutwardstothebranchesofallthe othertreesroundabout,asthoughtheyhaddroppedastone into the quiet slumber of the river-valley and set up ripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked at thelittlefireandstampedoutthesparks.But Frodo,without any clear idea of why he did so, or what he hoped for, ran along the path crying help! help! help! It seemed to him that hecould hardlyhear thesound ofhisown shrillvoice: itwas
156 the fellowship of the ring blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a clamour of leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate: lost and witless. Suddenly he stopped. There was an answer, or so he thought;butitseemedtocomefrombehindhim,awaydown the path further back in the Forest. He turned round and listened, and soon there could be no doubt: someone was singing a song; a deep glad voice was singing carelessly and happily, but it was singing nonsense: Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo! Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow! Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo! Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both stood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words (or so they seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song: Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My darling! Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling. Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight, Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight, There my pretty lady is, River-woman’s daughter, Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water. Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing? Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! and merry-o, Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o! Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away! Tom’s in a hurry now. Evening will follow day. Tom’s going home again water-lilies bringing. Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing? Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The leaves hung silently again on stiff branches. There was another burst of song, and then suddenly, hopping and
the old forest 157 dancing along the path, there appeared above the reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuckintheband.Withanotherhopandaboundtherecame intoviewaman,orsoitseemed.Atanyratehewastoolarge andheavyforahobbit,ifnotquitetallenoughforoneofthe Big People,thoughhemadenoiseenoughforone,stumping along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging throughgrassandrusheslikeacowgoingdowntodrink.He had a blue coat and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face was red as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his hands he carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white water-lilies. ‘Help!’ cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their hands stretched out. ‘Whoa!Whoa!steadythere!’criedtheoldman,holdingup one hand, and they stopped short, as if they had been struck stiff.‘Now,mylittlefellows,wherebeyoua-goingto,puffing like a bellows? What’s the matter here then? Do you know who I am? I’m Tom Bombadil. Tell me what’s your trouble! Tom’s in a hurry now. Don’t you crush my lilies!’ ‘My friends are caught in the willow-tree,’ cried Frodo breathlessly. ‘Master Merry’s being squeezed in a crack!’ cried Sam. ‘What?’shouted Tom Bombadil,leapingupintheair.‘Old Man Willow?Naughtworsethanthat,eh?Thatcansoonbe mended. I know the tune for him. Old grey Willow-man! I’ll freeze his marrow cold, if he don’t behave himself. I’ll sing his roots off. I’ll sing a wind up and blow leaf and branch away. Old Man Willow!’ Setting down his lilies carefully on the grass, he ran to the tree. There he saw Merry’s feet still sticking out – the rest had already been drawn further inside. Tom put his mouth to the crack and began singing into it in a low voice. They couldnotcatchthewords,butevidently Merrywasaroused. His legs began to kick. Tom sprang away, and breaking off a hanging branch smote the side of the willow with it. ‘You let them out again, Old Man Willow!’ he said. ‘What be you
158 the fellowship of the ring a-thinking of? You should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water! Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!’ He then seized Merry’s feet and drew him out of the suddenly widening crack. There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then withaloudsnapbothcracksclosedfastagain.Ashudderran through the tree from root to tip, and complete silence fell. ‘Thank you!’ said the hobbits, one after the other. Tom Bombadilburstoutlaughing.‘Well,mylittlefellows!’ saidhe,stoopingsothathepeeredintotheirfaces.‘Youshall comehomewithme!Thetableisallladenwithyellowcream, honeycomb, and white bread and butter. Goldberry is wait- ing.Timeenoughforquestionsaroundthesuppertable.You followaftermeasquickasyouareable!’Withthathepicked up his lilies, and then with a beckoning wave of his hand went hopping and dancing along the path eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically. Toosurprisedandtoorelievedtotalk,thehobbitsfollowed after him as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soondisappeared infront ofthem, andthe noiseof his singinggotfainterandfurtheraway.Suddenlyhisvoicecame floating back to them in a loud halloo! Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle! Tom’s going on ahead candles for to kindle. Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping. When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open, Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow. Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow! Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you. Hey now! merry dol! We’ll be waiting for you! After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the sunseemedtosinkintothetreesbehindthem.Theythought of the slanting light of evening glittering on the Brandywine River, and the windows of Bucklebury beginning to gleam
the old forest 159 with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them; trunksandbranches oftreeshungdark andthreateningover the path. White mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the roots of the trees upon its borders.Outoftheverygroundattheirfeetashadowysteam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk. It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on either side of them; and if they looked up to the pale sky, they caught sight of queer gnarled and knobbly faces that gloomed dark against the twilight, and leered down at them from the high bank and theedgesofthewood.Theybegantofeelthatallthiscountry wasunreal,andthattheywerestumblingthroughanominous dream that led to no awakening. Justastheyfelttheirfeetslowingdowntoastandstill,they noticed that the ground was gently rising. The water began to murmur. In the darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the river flowed over a short fall. Then sud- denlythetreescametoanendandthemistswereleftbehind. They stepped out from the Forest, and found a wide sweep of grass welling up before them. The river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily down to meet them, glinting here andthereinthelightofthestars,whichwerealreadyshining in the sky. The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge. The path was now plain before them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It wound up on to the top of a grassy knoll, now grey under the pale starry night; and there, still high above them on a further slope, they saw the twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up again, up a long smooth hillside of turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow beam flowed out brightly from a door that was opened. There was Tom Bombadil’s house before them, up, down, under hill. Behind it a steep shoulder of the land lay grey and bare, and
160 the fellowship of the ring beyond that the dark shapes of the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night. Theyallhurriedforward,hobbitsandponies.Alreadyhalf their weariness and all their fears had fallen from them. Hey! Come merry dol! rolled out the song to greet them. Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties! Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties. Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together! Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like the song of a glad water flowing down into the night from a bright morning in the hills, came falling like silver to meet them: Now let the song begin! Let us sing together Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather, Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather, Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather, Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water: Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter! And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, and a golden light was all about them.
Chapter 7 IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL Thefourhobbitssteppedoverthewidestonethreshold,and stoodstill,blinking.Theywereinalonglowroom,filledwith the light of lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly. In a chair, at the far side of the room facing the outer door, sat a woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her gown was green, green as young reeds, shot withsilverlikebeadsofdew;andherbeltwasofgold,shaped like a chain of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue eyes of forget- me-nots. About her feet in wide vessels of green and brown earthenware, white water-lilies were floating, so that she seemed to be enthroned in the midst of a pool. ‘Enter, good guests!’ she said, and as she spoke they knew thatitwasherclearvoicetheyhadheardsinging.Theycame a few timid steps further into the room, and began to bow low, feeling strangely surprised and awkward, like folk that, knocking at a cottage door to beg for a drink of water, have been answered by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers.Butbeforetheycouldsayanything,shespranglightly up and over the lily-bowls, and ran laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river. ‘Comedearfolk!’shesaid,taking Frodobythehand.‘Laugh and be merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.’ Then lightly she passed them and closing the door she turned her backtoit,withherwhitearmsspreadoutacrossit.‘Letusshut outthenight!’shesaid.‘Foryouarestillafraid,perhaps,ofmist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things. Fear nothing!Fortonightyouareundertheroofof Tom Bombadil.’
162 the fellowship of the ring The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and smiled. ‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ said Frodo at last, feeling his heart moved with a joy that he did not understand. He stood as he had at times stood enchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was different: less keen and lofty was the delight, but deeper and nearer to mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. ‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ he said again. ‘Now the joy that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to me. O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water! O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter! O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after! O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves’ laughter!’ Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with sur- prise to hear himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed. ‘Welcome!’shesaid.‘Ihadnotheardthatfolkofthe Shire were so sweet-tongued. But I see that you are an Elf-friend; the light in your eyes and the ring in your voice tells it. This is a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait for the Master of the house! He will not be long. He is tending your tired beasts.’ The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberrybusiedherselfaboutthetable;andtheireyes followed her, for the slender grace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere behind the house camethesoundofsinging.Everynowandagaintheycaught, among many a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding dillo the repeated words: Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow; Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow. ‘Fair lady!’ said Frodo again after a while. ‘Tell me, if my asking does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?’
in the house of tom bombadil 163 ‘He is,’ said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling. Frodolookedatherquestioningly.‘Heis,asyouhaveseen him,’ she said in answer to his look. ‘He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.’ ‘Then all this strange land belongs to him?’ ‘No indeed!’ she answered, and her smile faded. ‘That would indeed bea burden,’ she added in alow voice, as if to herself. ‘The trees and the grasses and all things growing or living in the land belong each to themselves. Tom Bombadil is the Master. No one has ever caught old Tom walking in theforest,wadinginthewater,leapingonthehill-topsunder light andshadow. Hehas no fear.Tom Bombadilis master.’ A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat and his thick brown hair was crowned with autumn leaves. He laughed, and going to Goldberry, took her hand. ‘Here’s my pretty lady!’ he said, bowing to the hobbits. ‘Here’smy Goldberryclothedallinsilver-greenwithflowers in her girdle! Is the table laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white bread, and butter; milk, cheese, and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for us? Is the supper ready?’ ‘It is,’ said Goldberry; ‘but the guests perhaps are not?’ Tomclappedhishandsandcried:‘Tom,Tom!yourguests are tired, and you had near forgotten! Come now, my merry friends, and Tom will refresh you! You shall clean grimy hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!’ He opened the door, and they followed him down a short passage and round a sharp turn. They came to a low room with a sloping roof (a penthouse, it seemed, built on to the north end of the house). Its walls were of clean stone, but theyweremostlycoveredwithgreenhangingmatsandyellow curtains. The floor was flagged, and strewn with fresh green rushes. There were four deep mattresses, each piled with white blankets, laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench laden with wide earthenware
164 the fellowship of the ring basins, and beside it stood brown ewers filled with water, somecold,somesteaminghot.Thereweresoftgreenslippers set ready beside each bed. Beforelong,washedandrefreshed,thehobbitswereseated at the table, two on each side, while at either end sat Gold- berryandthe Master.Itwasalongandmerrymeal.Though the hobbits ate, as only famished hobbits can eat, there was nolack.Thedrinkintheirdrinking-bowlsseemedtobeclear cold water, yet it went to their hearts like wine and set free their voices. The guests became suddenly aware that they weresingingmerrily,asifitwaseasierandmorenaturalthan talking. At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table swiftly. The guests were commanded to sit quiet, and were setinchairs,eachwithafootstooltohistiredfeet.Therewas a fire in the wide hearth before them, and it was burning with a sweet smell, as if it were built of apple-wood. When everything was set in order, all the lights in the room were put out, except one lamp and a pair of candles at each end ofthechimney-shelf.Then Goldberrycameandstoodbefore them, holding a candle; and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep. ‘Have peace now,’ she said, ‘until the morning! Heed no nightly noises! For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top. Goodnight!’Shepassedoutoftheroomwithaglimmerand a rustle. The sound of her footsteps was like a stream falling gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night. Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them tried to muster the courage to ask one of the many questions he had meant to ask at supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke: ‘Didyouhearmecalling,Master,orwasitjustchancethat brought you at that moment?’ Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. ‘Eh, what?’ said he. ‘Did I hear you calling? Nay, I did not
in the house of tom bombadil 165 hear: I was busy singing. Just chance brought me then, if chance you call it. It was no plan of mine, though I was waitingforyou.Weheardnewsofyou,andlearnedthatyou were wandering. We guessed you’d come ere long down to thewater:allpathsleadthatway,downto Withywindle.Old grey Willow-man,he’samightysinger;andit’shardforlittle folk to escape his cunning mazes. But Tom had an errand there,thathedarednothinder.’Tomnoddedasifsleepwas taking him again; but he went on in a soft singing voice: I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies, green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady, the last ere the year’s end to keep them from the winter, to flower by her pretty feet till the snows are melted. Each year at summer’s end I go to find them for her, in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle; there they open first in spring and there they linger latest. By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter, fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes. Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating! He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue: And that proved well for you – for now I shall no longer go down deep again along the forest-water, not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing Old Man Willow’s house this side of spring-time, not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water. He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one more question: the one he most desired to have answered. ‘Tell us, Master,’ he said, ‘about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.’ ‘No, don’t!’ said Merry and Pippin together, sitting sud- denly upright. ‘Not now! Not until the morning!’
166 the fellowship of the ring ‘That is right!’ said the old man. ‘Now is the time for resting. Some things are ill to hear when the world’s in shadow.Sleeptillthemorning-light,restonthepillow!Heed nonightlynoise!Fearnogreywillow!’Andwiththathetook down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a candle in either hand he led them out of the room. Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the blanketswereofwhitewool.Theyhadhardlylaidthemselves onthedeepbedsanddrawnthelightcoversoverthembefore they were asleep. Inthedeadnight,Frodolayinadreamwithoutlight.Then he saw the young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall of rock, pierced by a dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circle ofhills,andthatwithinitwasaplain,andinthemidstofthe plainstoodapinnacleofstone,likeavasttowerbutnotmade byhands.Onitstopstoodthefigureofaman.Themoonas it rose seemed to hang for a moment above his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the darkplainbelowcamethecryingoffellvoices,andthehowl- ing of many wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the moon. The figure lifted his arms and a light flashed from the staff that he wielded. A mighty eagle swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed and the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a strongwindblowing,andonitwasbornethesoundofhoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East. ‘Black Riders!’ thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs stillechoinginhismind.Hewonderedifhewouldeveragain have the courage to leave the safety of these stone walls. He lay motionless, still listening; but all was now silent, and at last he turned and fell asleep again or wandered into some other unremembered dream. At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly; but a change came over his dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly
in the house of tom bombadil 167 he woke, or thought he had waked, and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his dream: tip-tap, squeak: the noise was like branches fretting in the wind, twig-fingers scraping wall and window: creak, creak, creak. He wondered if there were willow-trees close to the house; and then suddenly he had a dreadful feeling that he was not inanordinaryhouseatall,butinsidethewillowandlistening to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him again. He sat up, and felt the soft pillows yield to his hands, and he lay down again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his ears: ‘Fear nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!’ Then he went to sleep again. It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his quietsleep:waterstreamingdowngently,andthenspreading, spreadingirresistiblyallroundthehouseintoadarkshoreless pool. It gurgled under the walls, and was rising slowly but surely. ‘I shall be drowned!’ he thought. ‘It will find its way in,andthen I shalldrown.’Hefeltthathe waslyinginasoft slimy bog, and springing up he set his foot on the corner of a cold hard flagstone. Then he remembered where he was andlaydownagain.Heseemedtohearorrememberhearing: ‘Nothing passes doors or windows save moonlight and star- lightandthewindoffthehill-top.’Alittlebreathofsweetair moved the curtain. He breathed deep and fell asleep again. As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night in deep content, if logs are contented. Theywokeup,allfouratonce,inthemorninglight.Tom was moving about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them stir he clapped his hands, and cried: ‘Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!’ He drew back the yellow curtains, and the hobbits saw that these had covered thewindows,ateither endoftheroom,onelooking eastand the other looking west. Theyleaptuprefreshed.Frodorantotheeasternwindow, and found himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to see turf right up to the walls,
168 the fellowship of the ring turf all pocked with hoof-prints. Actually his view was screened by a tall line of beans on poles; but above and far beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise.Itwasapalemorning:inthe East,behindlongclouds likelinesofsoiledwoolstainedredattheedges,layglimmer- ing deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of rain to come; but the light was broadening quickly, and the red flowers on the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves. Pippinlookedoutofthewesternwindow,downintoapool of mist. The Forest was hidden under a fog. It was like looking down on to a sloping cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken into many plumes and billows: the valley of the Withywindle. The stream ran down the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand was a flower-garden and a clipped hedge silver-netted, and beyond that grey shaven grass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen. ‘Good morning, merry friends!’ cried Tom, opening the eastern window wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a rainy smell. ‘Sun won’t show her face much today, I’m thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hill-tops, since the greydawnbegan,nosingwindandweather,wetgrassunder- foot, wet sky above me. I wakened Goldberry singing under window; but naught wakes hobbit-folk in the early morning.Inthenightlittle folkwakeupinthedarkness,and sleep after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, my merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring a ding dillo del! derry del, my hearties! If you come soon you’ll find breakfast on the table. If you come late you’ll get grass and rain-water!’ Needless to say – not that Tom’s threat sounded very serious – the hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning to look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry were there. Tom could be heard about the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and singing here and there outside. The room looked
in the house of tom bombadil 169 westward over the mist-clouded valley, and the window was open. Water dripped down from the thatched eaves above. Beforetheyhadfinishedbreakfastthecloudshadjoinedinto an unbroken roof, and a straight grey rain came softly and steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was com- pletely veiled. Astheylookedoutofthewindowtherecamefallinggently as if it was flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear voice of Goldberry singing up above them. They could hear few words, but it seemed plain to them that the song was a rain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the tale of a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far below.Thehobbitslistenedwithdelight;and Frodowasglad in his heart, and blessed the kindly weather, because it delayedthemfromdeparting.Thethoughtofgoinghadbeen heavyuponhimfromthemomentheawoke;butheguessed now that they would not go further that day. Theupperwindsettledinthe Westanddeeperandwetter clouds rolled up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could be seen all round the house but falling water. Frodo stood near the open door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and go bubbling away down into the valley. Tom Bombadil came trotting round the corner of the house, waving his arms as if he was warding off the rain – and indeed when he sprang over the threshold he seemedquite dry, except for his boots. These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then he satinthelargestchairandcalledthehobbitstogatherround him. ‘This is Goldberry’s washing day,’ he said, ‘and her autumn-cleaning. Too wet for hobbit-folk – let them rest whiletheyareable!It’sagooddayforlongtales,forquestions and for answers, so Tom will start the talking.’ He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes half as if speaking to himself, sometimes looking at them suddenlywitha brightblueeyeunder hisdeepbrows.Often
170 the fellowship of the ring his voice would turn to song, and he would get out of his chairanddanceabout.Hetoldthemtalesofbeesandflowers, the ways of trees, and the strange creatures of the Forest, about the evil things and good things, things friendly and things unfriendly, cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden under brambles. As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest, apart from themselves, indeed to feel themselves as the strangers where all other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out of his talk was Old Man Willow, and Frodolearnednowenoughtocontenthim,indeedmorethan enough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom’s words laid bare the hearts of trees and their thoughts, which were often darkandstrange,andfilledwithahatredofthingsthatgofree upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forest without reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten woods; and in it there lived yet, ageing no quicker thanthehills,thefathersofthefathersoftrees,remembering times when they were lords. The countless years had filled them with pride and rooted wisdom, and with malice. But none were more dangerous than the Great Willow: his heart was rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning, andamasterofwinds,andhissongandthoughtranthrough the woods on both sides of the river. His grey thirsty spirit drewpoweroutoftheearthandspreadlikefineroot-threads in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till it had underitsdominionnearlyall thetreesofthe Forestfromthe Hedge to the Downs. Suddenly Tom’s talk left the woods and went leaping up theyoungstream,overbubblingwaterfalls,overpebblesand worn rocks, and among small flowers in close grass and wet crannies, wandering at last up on to the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the green mounds, and the stone- ringsuponthehillsandinthehollowsamongthehills.Sheep were bleating in flocks. Green walls and white walls rose. Therewerefortressesontheheights.Kingsoflittlekingdoms
in the house of tom bombadil 171 foughttogether,andtheyoung Sunshonelikefireonthered metaloftheirnewandgreedyswords.Therewasvictoryand defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames went up into the sky. Gold was piled on the biers of dead kings and queens; and mounds covered them, and the stone doors were shut; and the grass grew over all. Sheep walked for a while biting the grass, but soon the hills were empty again. A shadow came out of dark places far away, and the bones were stirred in the mounds. Barrow-wights walked in the hollow places with a clink of rings on cold fingers, and goldchainsinthewind.Stoneringsgrinnedoutoftheground like broken teeth in the moonlight. The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire the rumour of the Barrow-wights of the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had been heard. But it was not a tale that any hobbit liked to listento,evenbyacomfortablefiresidefaraway.Thesefour now suddenly remembered what the joy of this house had drivenfromtheirminds:thehouseof Tom Bombadilnestled under the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They lost the thread of his tale and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another. When they caught his words again they found that he had nowwanderedintostrangeregionsbeyondtheirmemoryand beyondtheir wakingthought,into timeswhenthe worldwas wider,andtheseasflowedstraighttothewestern Shore;and stillonandback Tomwentsingingoutintoancientstarlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he stopped, and they saw that he nodded as if he was falling asleep. The hobbits sat still before him, enchanted; and it seemed as if, under the spell of his words, the wind had gone, and the clouds had dried up, and the day had been withdrawn,anddarknesshadcomefrom Eastand West,and all the sky was filled with the light of white stars. Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many days had passed Frodo could not tell. He did not feel either hungry or tired, only filled with wonder. The stars shone through the window and the silence of the heavens seemed
172 the fellowship of the ring to be round him. He spoke at last out of his wonder and a sudden fear of that silence: ‘Who are you, Master?’ he asked. ‘Eh, what?’ said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in the gloom. ‘Don’t you know my name yet? That’s the only answer.Tellme,whoare you,alone,yourselfandnameless? But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that’s what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the river andthetrees;Tomremembersthefirstraindropandthefirst acorn. He made paths before the Big People, and saw the little People arriving. He was here before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed west- ward, Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. He knew the dark under the stars when it was fearless – before the Dark Lord came from Outside.’ A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits glanced hastily through the panes. When they turned again, Goldberrystoodinthedoorbehind,framedinlight.Sheheld a candle, shieldingits flame from the draught withher hand; and the light flowed through it, like sunlight through a white shell. ‘Therainhasended,’shesaid;‘andnewwatersarerunning downhill, under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!’ ‘And let us have food and drink!’ cried Tom. ‘Long tales arethirsty.Andlonglistening’shungrywork,morning,noon, andevening!’Withthathejumpedoutofhischair,andwith a bound took a candle from the chimney-shelf and lit it in the flame that Goldberry held; then he danced about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and dis- appeared. Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then Tom and Goldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat half in wonder and half in laughter: so fair was the grace of Gold- berry and so merry and odd the caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they seemed to weave a single dance, neither hinderingtheother,inandoutoftheroom,androundabout the table; and with great speed food and vessels and lights
in the house of tom bombadil 173 weresetinorder.Theboardsblazedwithcandles,whiteand yellow. Tom bowed to his guests. ‘Supper is ready,’ said Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was clothed all in silver with a white girdle, and her shoes were like fishes’ mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain-washed forget-me-nots, and he had green stockings. Itwasasupperevenbetterthanbefore.Thehobbitsunder thespellof Tom’swordsmayhavemissedonemealormany, butwhen thefood wasbefore themitseemed atleast aweek since they had eaten. They did not sing or even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after a time their hearts and spirits rose high again, and their voices rang out in mirth and laughter. Aftertheyhadeaten,Goldberrysangmanysongsforthem, songs thatbegan merrily in thehills and fellsoftly down into silence;andinthesilencestheysawintheirmindspoolsand waterswiderthananytheyhadknown,andlookingintothem they saw the sky below them and the stars like jewels in the depths. Then once more she wished them each good night and left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them with questions. He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and indeed to know much of all the history anddoings ofthe Shiredown fromdayshardly remembered among the hobbits themselves. It no longer surprised them; but he made no secret that he owed his recent knowledge largely to Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a personofmoreimportancethantheyhadimagined.‘There’s earth under his old feet, and clay on his fingers; wisdom in hisbones,andbothhis eyesareopen,’said Tom.Itwasalso clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo. Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning,that Frodofoundhimselftellinghimmoreabout Bilbo and his own hopes and fears than he had told before
174 the fellowship of the ring even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down, and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders. ‘Showmetheprecious Ring!’hesaidsuddenlyinthemidst of the story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from his pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom. It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big brown-skinnedhand.Thensuddenlyheputittohiseyeand laughed.Forasecondthehobbitshadavision,bothcomical andalarming,ofhisbrightblueeyegleamingthroughacircle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then they gasped. There was no sign of Tom disappearing! Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air – and it vanished with a flash. Frodo gave a cry – and Tom leaned forward and handed it back to him with a smile. Frodolookedatitclosely,andrathersuspiciously(likeone who has lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the same and weighed the same: for that Ring had alwaysseemedto Frodotoweighstrangelyheavyinthehand. But something promptedhim to make sure.He was perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so light of what even Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited for an opportunity, when the talk was going again, and Tomwastellinganabsurdstoryaboutbadgersandtheir queer ways – then he slipped the Ring on. Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his own ring all right, for Merry was staring blanklyat hischair, andobviouslycould notseehim. Hegot upandcreptquietlyawayfromthefiresidetowardstheouter door. ‘Heythere!’ cried Tom, glancingtowards himwitha most seeing look in his shining eyes. ‘Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you a-going? Old Tom Bombadil’s not as blind as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand’s more fair
in the house of tom bombadil 175 withoutit.Comeback!Leaveyourgameandsitdownbeside me!Wemusttalkawhilemore,andthinkaboutthemorning. Tom must teach the right road, and keep your feet from wandering.’ Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he came and sat down again. Tom now told them that hereckonedthe Sunwouldshinetomorrow,anditwouldbe a glad morning, and setting out would be hopeful. But they would do well to start early; for weather in that country was a thing that even Tom could not be sure of for long, and it would change sometimes quicker than he could change his jacket. ‘I am no weather-master,’ said he; ‘nor is aught that goes on two legs.’ Byhisadvicetheydecidedtomakenearlydue Northfrom his house, over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: theymighthopeinthatwaytostrikethe East Roadinaday’s journey,andavoidthe Barrows.Hetoldthemnottobeafraid – but to mind their own business. ‘Keep to the green grass. Don’t you go a-meddling with oldstoneorcold Wightsorpryingintheirhouses,unlessyou bestrongfolkwithheartsthatneverfalter!’Hesaidthismore than once; and he advised them to pass barrows by on the west-side, if they chanced to stray near one. Then he taught them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill-luck fall into any danger or difficulty the next day. Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow, By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped them each on the shoulder with a laugh, and taking candles led them back to their bedroom.
Chapter 8 FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or out of them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet singingrunninginhismind:asongthatseemedtocomelike a pale light behind a grey rain-curtain, and growing stronger toturntheveilalltoglassandsilver,untilatlastitwasrolled back, and a far green country opened before him under a swift sunrise. The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whist- ling like a tree-full of birds; and the sun was already slanting down the hill and through the open window. Outside every- thing was green and pale gold. After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made readytosayfarewell,asnearlyheavyofheartaswaspossible on such a morning: cool, bright, and clean under a washed autumnskyofthinblue.Theaircamefreshfromthe North- west. Their quiet ponies were almost frisky, sniffing and movingrestlessly.Tomcameoutofthehouseandwavedhis hat and danced upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good speed. They rode off along a path that wound away from behind thehouse,andwentslantinguptowardsthenorthendofthe hill-browunderwhichitsheltered.Theyhadjustdismounted to lead their ponies up the last steep slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped. ‘Goldberry!’hecried.‘Myfairlady,cladallinsilvergreen! We have never said farewell to her, nor seen her since the evening!’ He was so distressed that he turned back; but at that moment a clear call came rippling down. There on the hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair was flying loose, and as it caught the sun it shone and shimmered. A
fog on the barrow-downs 177 lightliketheglintofwaterondewygrassflashedfromunder her feet as she danced. They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless besideher.Theybowed,butwithawaveofherarmshebade them look round; and they looked out from the hill-top over landsunderthemorning.Itwasnowasclearandfar-seenas it had been veiled and misty when they stood upon the knoll inthe Forest,whichcouldnowbeseenrisingpaleandgreen out of the dark trees in the West. In that direction the land rose in wooded ridges, green, yellow, russet under the sun, beyond which lay hidden the valley of the Brandywine. To the South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was a distantglintlikepaleglasswherethe Brandywine Rivermade a great loop in the lowlands and flowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits. Northward beyond the dwindling downs the land ran away in flats and swellings of grey and green and pale earth-colours, until it faded into a featureless and shadowy distance. Eastward the Barrow-downs rose, ridge behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesightintoaguess:itwasnomorethanaguessofblueand a remote white glimmer blending with the hem of the sky, but it spoke to them, out of memory and old tales, of the high and distant mountains. Theytookadeepdraughtoftheair,andfeltthataskipand afewstoutstrideswouldbearthemwherevertheywished.It seemed fainthearted to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs towards the Road, when they should be leaping,aslustyas Tom,overthesteppingstonesofthehills straight towards the Mountains. Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts. ‘Speed now, fair guests!’ she said. ‘And hold to your purpose! North with the wind in the left eye and a blessingonyourfootsteps!Makehastewhilethe Sunshines!’ And to Frodo she said: ‘Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merry meeting!’ But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mountedhispony,andfollowedbyhisfriendsjoggedslowly
178 the fellowship of the ring downthegentleslopebehindthehill.Tom Bombadil’shouse andthevalley,andthe Forestwerelosttoview.Theairgrew warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside, and the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when they reached the bottom of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small and slender like a sunlit flower against the sky: she was standing still watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked she gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished behind the hill. Theirwaywoundalongthefloorofthehollow,andround thegreenfeetofa steephillintoanotherdeeperandbroader valley,andthenovertheshouldersoffurtherhills,anddown their long limbs, and up their smooth sides again, up on to new hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was no tree nor any visible water: it was a country of grass and short springy turf, silent except for the whisper of the air over the edges of the land, and high lonely cries of strange birds. As they journeyed the sun mounted, and grew hot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown less. When they caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forestseemedtobesmoking,asifthefallenrainwas steaming up again from leaf and root and mould. A shadow nowlayroundtheedgeofsight,adarkhazeabovewhichthe upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy. About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide and flattened, like a shallow saucer with a green mounded rim.Insidetherewasnoairstirring,andtheskyseemednear their heads. They rode across and looked northwards. Then their hearts rose; for it seemed plain that they had come further already than they had expected. Certainly the dis- tances had now all become hazy and deceptive, but there could be no doubt that the Downs were coming to an end. Alongvalleylaybelowthemwindingawaynorthwards,until itcametoanopening betweentwosteepshoulders.Beyond, there seemed to be no more hills. Due north they faintly
fog on the barrow-downs 179 glimpsedalongdarkline.‘Thatisalineoftrees,’said Merry, ‘and that must mark the Road. All along it for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing. Some say they were planted in the old days.’ ‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘If we make as good going this afternoon as we have done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and be jogging on in search of a camping place.’ But even as he spoke he turned his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and looked down upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green mounds, and on some were standing stones,pointingupwardslikejaggedteethoutofgreengums. That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from the sight and went down into the hollow circle. In the midst of it there stood a single stone, standing tall under the sun above, and at this hour casting no shadow. It was shapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding finger, or morelikeawarning.Buttheywerenowhungry,andthesun was still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of the stone. It was cool, as if the sun had had no power to warm it; but at that time this seemed pleasant. There they took food and drink, and made as good a noon- meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came from ‘down under Hill’. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of the day. Their ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass. Riding over the hills, and eating their fill, the warm sun and the scent of turf, lying a little too long, stretching out their legs and looking at the sky above their noses: these thingsare,perhaps,enoughtoexplainwhathappened.How- ever that may be: they woke suddenly and uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant to take. The standing stone was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward over them. The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming through the mist just above the west wall of the hollow in which they lay; north, south, and east, beyond the
180 the fellowship of the ring wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavyandchill.Theirponieswerestandingcrowdedtogether with their heads down. The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the western rim. They found that they were upon an island in thefog.Evenastheylookedoutindismaytowardsthesetting sun,itsankbeforetheireyesintoawhitesea,andacoldgrey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog rolled up to thewallsandroseabovethem,andasitmounteditbentover their heads until it became a roof: they were shut in a hall of mist whose central pillar was the standing stone. They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did not quite lose heart. They still remembered the hopeful view they had had of the line of the Road ahead, and they still knew in which direction it lay. In any case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place about the stone that no thought of remaining there was in their minds. They packed up as quickly as their chilled fingers would work. Soon they were leading their ponies in single file over the rimanddownthelongnorthwardslopeofthehill,downinto a foggy sea. As they went down the mist became colder and damper, and their hair hung lank and dripping on their foreheads.Whentheyreachedthebottomitwassochillthat theyhaltedandgotoutcloaksandhoods,whichsoonbecame bedewedwithgreydrops.Then,mountingtheirponies,they went slowly on again, feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as well as they could guess, forthegate-likeopeningatthefarnorthwardendofthelong valley which they had seen in the morning. Once they were through the gap, they had only to keep on in anything like a straight line and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go beyond that, except for a vaguehopethatperhapsawaybeyondthe Downstheremight be no fog. Theirgoingwasveryslow.Topreventtheirgettingsepar- ated and wandering in different directions they went in file,
fog on the barrow-downs 181 with Frodoleading.Samwasbehindhim,andafterhimcame Pippin, and then Merry. The valley seemed to stretch on endlessly.Suddenly Frodosawahopefulsign.Oneitherside ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he guessed that they were at last approaching the gap in the hills, the north-gate of the Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free. ‘Come on! Follow me!’ he called back over his shoulder, andhehurriedforward.Buthishopesoonchangedtobewil- derment and alarm. The dark patches grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous before him and leaning slightly towards one another like the pillars of a headless door, two huge standing stones. He could not remember having seen any sign of these in the valley, when he looked out from the hill in the morning. He had passed between them almost before he was aware: and even as he did so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony reared and snorted, and he fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others had not followed him. ‘Sam!’ he called. ‘Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why don’t you keep up?’ Therewasnoanswer.Feartookhim,andheranbackpast the stones shouting wildly: ‘Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!’ The pony bolted intothe mist and vanished. From someway off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: ‘Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!’Itwasawayeastward,onhisleftashestoodunderthe greatstones,staringandstrainingintothegloom.Heplunged offinthedirectionofthecall,andfoundhimselfgoingsteeply uphill. As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and more frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it seemed faint and far ahead and high above him. ‘Frodo! Hoy!’ came the thin voices out of the mist: and thenacrythatsoundedlikehelp,help!oftenrepeated,ending with a last help! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut short. He stumbled forward with all the speed he could towards the cries; but the light was now gone, and clinging
182 the fellowship of the ring night had closed about him, so that it was impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time to be climbing up and up. Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told himwhenheatlastcametothetopofaridgeorhill.Hewas weary, sweating and yet chilled. It was wholly dark. ‘Where are you?’ he cried out miserably. There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware that it was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy wind. A change was coming intheweather.Themistwasflowingpasthimnowinshreds and tatters. His breath was smoking, and the darkness was less near and thick. He looked up and saw with surprise that faint stars were appearing overhead amid the strands of hurrying cloud and fog. The wind began to hiss over the grass. He imagined suddenly that he caught a muffled cry, and hemadetowardsit;andevenashewentforwardthemistwas rolledupandthrustaside,andthestarryskywasunveiled.A glance showed him that he was now facing southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must have climbed from the north. Out of the east the biting wind was blowing. To hisrightthereloomedagainstthewestwardstarsadarkblack shape. A great barrow stood there. ‘Where are you?’ he cried again, both angry and afraid. ‘Here!’ said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of the ground. ‘I am waiting for you!’ ‘No!’said Frodo;buthedidnotrunaway.Hiskneesgave, andhe fellonthe ground.Nothinghappened, andtherewas no sound. Trembling he looked up, in time to see a tall dark figure like a shadow against the stars. It leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a pale light that seemed to come from some remote distance. Then a grip stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and he remembered no more. * * *
fog on the barrow-downs 183 When he came to himself again, for a moment he could recall nothing except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was imprisoned, caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow.ABarrow-wighthadtakenhim,andhewasprobably alreadyunderthedreadfulspellsofthe Barrow-wightsabout which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself: flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast. But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the very darkness that was round him, he found himself ashelaythinkingabout Bilbo Bagginsandhisstories,oftheir jogging along together in the lanes of the Shire and talking about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid hobbit, waiting for some final and desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo was neither very fat nor very timid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terribleend,butthethoughthardenedhim.Hefoundhimself stiffening,as iffor afinal spring;heno longerfelt limplike a helpless prey. As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish light was growing round him. It did not at first show him what kind of a place he was in, for the light seemedtobecomingoutofhimself,andfromthefloorbeside him,andhadnotyetreachedtherooforwall.Heturned,and there in the cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. Theywere ontheirbacks, andtheir faceslooked deathly pale; and they were clad in white. About them lay many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light they looked cold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chainswereabouttheirwaists,andontheirfingersweremany rings.Swordslaybytheirsides,andshieldswereattheirfeet. But across their three necks lay one long naked sword. * * *
184 the fellowship of the ring Suddenly a songbegan: a cold murmur,rising and falling. Thevoiceseemedfarawayandimmeasurablydreary,some- times high in the air and thin, sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad but horriblesounds,stringsofwordswouldnowandagainshape themselves: grim, hard, cold words, heartless and miserable. The night was railing against the morning of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the warmth for which it hungered.Frodowaschilledtothemarrow.Afterawhilethe songbecameclearer,andwithdreadinhisheartheperceived that it had changed into an incantation: Cold be hand and heart and bone, and cold be sleep under stone: never more to wake on stony bed, never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead. In the black wind the stars shall die, and still on gold here let them lie, till the dark lord lifts his hand over dead sea and withered land. He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind of passage which behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long arm was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest, andtowards the hilt ofthe sword thatlay upon him. At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stonebytheincantation.Thenawildthoughtofescapecame to him. He wondered if he put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find some way out.Hethoughtofhimselfrunningfreeoverthegrass,griev- ing for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive him- self. Gandalf would admit that there had been nothing else he could do. But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too strong: he could not leave his friends so easily. He
fog on the barrow-downs 185 wavered,gropinginhispocket,andthenfoughtwithhimself again;andashedidsothearmcreptnearer.Suddenlyresolve hardened in him, and he seized a short sword that lay beside him, and kneeling he stooped low over the bodies of his companions. With what strength he had he hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist, and the hand broke off; but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt. There was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a snarling noise. Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry’s face felt cold. Allatoncebackintohismind,fromwhichithaddisappeared with the first coming of the fog, came the memory of the house down under the Hill, and of Tom singing. He re- membered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil! and with that name his voice seemed to grow strong: it had a full and livelysound,andthedarkchamberechoedasiftodrumand trumpet. Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow, By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could hear his heart beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was coming down through the ground or through thick walls, an answering voice singing: Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow, Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow. None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master: His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster. Therewasaloudrumblingsound,asofstonesrollingand falling, and suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain light of day. A low door-like opening appeared at the end of
186 the fellowship of the ring thechamberbeyond Frodo’sfeet;andtherewas Tom’shead (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of the sun risingredbehindhim.Thelightfelluponthefloor,andupon the faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo. They did not stir, but the sickly hue had left them. They looked now as if they were only very deeply asleep. Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing: Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight! Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing, Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains! Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty! Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness, Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended. At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamber fell in with a crash. Then there was a long trailingshriek,fadingawayintoanunguessabledistance;and after that silence. ‘Come, friend Frodo!’ said Tom. ‘Let us get out on to clean grass! You must help me bear them.’ Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left the barrow for the last time he thought he saw a severedhandwrigglingstill,likeawoundedspider,inaheap of fallen earth. Tom went back in again, and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he was bearing in his arms a great load of treasure: things of gold,silver,copper,andbronze;manybeadsandchainsand jewelled ornaments. He climbed the green barrow and laid them all on top in the sunshine. There he stood, with his hat in his hand and the wind in his hair, and looked down upon the three hobbits, that had been laid on their backs upon the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a clear and commanding voice:
fog on the barrow-downs 187 Wake now my merry lads! Wake and hear me calling! Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen; Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken. Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open! To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their arms,rubbedtheireyes,andthensuddenlysprangup.They looked about in amazement, first at Frodo, and then at Tom standinglargeaslifeonthebarrow-topabovethem;andthen at themselves in their thin white rags, crowned and belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets. ‘What in the name of wonder?’ began Merry, feeling the golden circlet that had slipped over one eye. Then he stopped, anda shadow came overhis face, andhe closed his eyes. ‘Of course, I remember!’ he said. ‘The men of Carn Duˆm came on us at night, and we were worsted. Ah! the spear in my heart!’ He clutched at his breast. ‘No! No!’ he said,openinghiseyes.‘Whatam Isaying?Ihavebeendream- ing. Where did you get to, Frodo?’ ‘I thought that I was lost,’ said Frodo; ‘but I don’t want to speak of it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!’ ‘Dressed up like this, sir?’ said Sam. ‘Where are my clothes?’Heflunghiscirclet,belt,andringsonthegrass,and looked round helplessly, as if he expected to find his cloak, jacket, and breeches, and other hobbit-garments lying some- where to hand. ‘You won’t find your clothes again,’ said Tom, bounding down from the mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the sunlight. One would have thought that nothing dangerous or dreadful had happened; and indeed the horror faded out of their hearts as they looked at him, and saw the merry glint in his eyes. ‘What do you mean?’ asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half amused. ‘Why not?’ But Tom shook his head, saying: ‘You’ve found your- selvesagain,outofthedeepwater.Clothesarebutlittleloss,
188 the fellowship of the ring if you escape from drowning. Be glad, my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heat now heart and limb! Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a-hunting!’ He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him Frodo saw him running away southwards along the green hollow between their hill and the next, still whistling and crying: Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander? Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder? Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin, White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin! So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching it, until he was hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some timehisheynow!hoynow!camefloatingbackdownthewind, which had shifted round towards the south. The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran about for a while on the grass, as he told them. Then they laybaskinginthesunwiththedelightofthosethathavebeen wafted suddenly from bitter winter to a friendly clime, or of peoplethat,afterbeinglongillandbedridden,wakeoneday to find that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of promise. By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). He reappeared, hat first, over the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an obedient line six ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainly old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger, fatter (and older) than their own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had not, in fact, given them any such names, but they answered to the new names that Tom had given them for the rest of their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed over the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.
fog on the barrow-downs 189 ‘Here are your ponies, now!’ he said. ‘They’ve more sense (in some ways) than you wandering hobbits have – more sense in their noses. For they sniff danger ahead which you walk right into; and if they run to save themselves, then they runtherightway.Youmustforgivethemall;forthoughtheir hearts are faithful, to face fear of Barrow-wights is not what they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!’ Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare garments from their packs; and they soon felt too hot, for they were obliged to put on some of the thicker and warmer thingsthattheyhadbroughtagainsttheoncomingofwinter. ‘Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from?’ asked Frodo. ‘He’s mine,’ said Tom. ‘My four-legged friend; though I seldom ride him, and he wanders often far, free upon the hillsides.Whenyourponiesstayedwithme,theygottoknow my Lumpkin; and they smelt him in the night, and quickly ran to meet him. I thought he’d look for them and with his words of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old Tom’s going to ride. Hey! he’s coming with you,justtosetyouontheroad;soheneedsapony.Foryou cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, when you’re on your own legs trying to trot beside them.’ Thehobbitsweredelightedtohearthis,andthanked Tom manytimes;buthelaughed,andsaidthattheyweresogood at losing themselves that he would not feel happy till he had seen them safe over the borders of his land. ‘I’ve got things to do,’ he said: ‘my making and my singing, my talking and my walking, and my watching of the country. Tom can’t be always near to open doors and willow-cracks. Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting.’ It was still fairly early by the sun, something between nine and ten, and the hobbits turned their minds to food. Their last meal had been lunch beside the standing stone the day before. They breakfasted now off the remainder of Tom’s
190 the fellowship of the ring provisions, meant for their supper, with additions that Tom had brought with him. It was not a large meal (considering hobbitsandthecircumstances),buttheyfeltmuchbetterfor it. While they were eating Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he made into a pile that glistered and sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie there ‘free to all finders, birds, beasts, Elves or Men, and all kindly creatures’; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scatteredand no Wight ever come backto it. He choseforhimselffromthepileabroochsetwithbluestones, many-shadedlikeflax-flowersorthewingsofbluebutterflies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his head, and saying at last: ‘Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for his lady! Fair was she who long ago wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not forget her!’ For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf- shaped, and keen, of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold. They gleamed as he drewthemfromtheirblacksheaths,wroughtofsomestrange metal, light and strong, and set with many fiery stones. Whether by some virtue in these sheaths or because of the spell that lay on the mound, the blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun. ‘Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,’ he said. ‘Sharp blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking,east,south,orfarawayintodarkanddanger.’Then he told them that these blades were forged many long years agoby Menof Westernesse:theywerefoesofthe Dark Lord, buttheywereovercomebytheevilkingof Carn Duˆminthe Land of Angmar. ‘Few now remember them,’ Tom murmured, ‘yet still some go wandering, sons of forgotten kings walking in lone- liness, guarding from evil things folk that are heedless.’ Thehobbitsdidnotunderstandhiswords,butashespoke theyhadavisionasitwereofagreatexpanseofyearsbehind them, like a vast shadowy plain over which there strode
fog on the barrow-downs 191 shapes of Men, tall and grim with bright swords, and last cameonewithastaronhisbrow.Thenthevisionfaded,and they were back in the sunlit world. It was time to start again. Theymadeready,packingtheirbagsandladingtheirponies. Their new weapons they hung on their leather belts under their jackets, feeling them very awkward, and wondering if they would be of any use. Fighting had not before occurred to any of them as one of the adventures in which their flight would land them. At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; andthenmountingtheytrottedquicklyalongthevalley.They looked back and saw the top of the old mound on the hill, and from it the sunlight on the gold went up like a yellow flame.Then theyturned ashoulderof the Downsand itwas hidden from view. Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the great stones standing like a gate, and before long theycame tothe northerngapand rodeswiftlythrough, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry journey with Tom Bombadil trotting gaily beside them, or before them, on Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his girthpromised.Tomsangmostofthetime,butitwaschiefly nonsense,orelseperhapsastrangelanguageunknowntothe hobbits,anancientlanguagewhosewordsweremainlythose of wonder and delight. They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Roadwasfurtherawaythantheyhadimagined.Evenwithout afog,theirsleepatmid-daywouldhavepreventedthemfrom reaching it until after nightfall on the day before. The dark line they had seen was not a line of trees but a line of bushes growing on the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on the furtherside.Tomsaidthatithadoncebeentheboundaryof akingdom,butaverylongtimeago.Heseemedtoremember something sad about it, and would not say much. Theyclimbeddownandoutofthedikeandthroughagap in the wall, and then Tom turned due north, for they had
192 the fellowship of the ring been bearing somewhat to the west. The land was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace, but the sun was already sinking low when at last they saw a line of tall trees ahead, and they knew that they had come back to the Roadaftermanyunexpectedadventures.Theygallopedtheir ponies over the last furlongs, and halted under the long shadowsofthetrees.Theywereonthetopofaslopingbank, and the Road, now dim as evening drew on, wound away below them. At this point it ran nearly from South-west to North-east,andontheirrightitfellquicklydownintoawide hollow.Itwasruttedandboremanysignsoftherecentheavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes full of water. Theyrodedownthebankandlookedupanddown.There was nothing to be seen. ‘Well, here we are again at last!’ said Frodo.‘Isupposewehaven’tlostmorethantwodaysbymy shortcutthroughthe Forest!Butperhapsthedelaywillprove useful – it may have put them off our trail.’ The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the Black Riderscamesuddenlyoverthemagain.Eversincethey had entered the Forest they had thought chiefly of getting backtothe Road;onlynowwhenitlaybeneaththeirfeetdid they remember the danger which pursued them, and was more than likely to be lying in wait for them upon the Road itself. They looked anxiously back towards the setting sun, but the Road was brown and empty. ‘Doyouthink,’asked Pippinhesitatingly,‘doyouthinkwe may be pursued, tonight?’ ‘No, I hope not tonight,’ answered Tom Bombadil; ‘nor perhapsthenextday.Butdonottrustmyguess;for Icannot tell for certain. Out east my knowledge fails. Tom is not master of Riders from the Black Land far beyond his country.’ Allthesamethehobbitswishedhewascomingwiththem. Theyfeltthathewouldknowhowtodealwith Black Riders, if anyone did. They would soon now be going forward into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but the most vague and distant legends of the Shire, and in the gathering
fog on the barrow-downs 193 twilight they longed for home. A deep loneliness and sense oflosswasonthem.Theystoodsilent,reluctanttomakethe final parting, and only slowly became aware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting. ‘Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that your own luck must go with you and guide you): four miles along the Road you’ll come upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill, with doors looking westward. There you’ll find an old inn that is called The Prancing Pony. Barliman Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards the morning will speed you upon your way. Be bold,butwary!Keepupyourmerryhearts,andridetomeet your fortune!’ They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and drink once more with them; but he laughed and refused, saying: Tom’s country ends here: he will not pass the borders. Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting! Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin’s back, and rode up over the bank and away singing into the dusk. Thehobbitsclimbedupandwatchedhimuntilhewasout of sight. ‘I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil,’ said Sam. ‘He’s a caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a good deal further and see naught better, nor queerer. But I won’t deny I’llbegladtoseethis Prancing Ponyhespokeof.Ihope it’ll be like The Green Dragon away back home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?’ ‘There are hobbits in Bree,’ said Merry, ‘as well as Big Folk.Idaresayitwillbehomelikeenough.The Ponyisagood innbyallaccounts.Mypeoplerideouttherenowandagain.’ ‘It may be all we could wish,’ said Frodo; ‘but it is outside the Shire all the same. Don’t make yourselves too much at
194 the fellowship of the ring home! Please remember – all of you – that the name of Baggins must not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given.’ They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into the evening. Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded slowly downhill and up again, until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance ahead. Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass againstmistystars;andunderitswesternflanknestledalarge village. Towards it they now hurried desiring only to find a fire, and a door between them and the night.
Chapter 9 AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited region,likeanislandintheemptylandsroundabout.Besides Bree itself, there was Staddle on the other side of the hill, Combe in a deep valley a little further eastward, and Archet on the edge of the Chetwood. Lying round Bree-hill and the villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland only a few miles broad. The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather short, cheerful and independent: they belonged to nobody butthemselves;buttheyweremorefriendlyandfamiliarwith Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of the world aboutthemthanwas(oris)usualwith Big People.According totheirowntalestheyweretheoriginalinhabitantsandwere the descendants of the first Men that ever wandered into the West of the middle-world. Few had survived the turmoils of the Elder Days; but when the Kings returned again over the Great Sea they had found the Bree-men still there, and they were still there now, when the memory of the old Kings had faded into the grass. In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing of their origin. They were taller and darker than the Men of Bree and were believed to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards even as far as the Misty Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen. When they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange forgotten tales which were
196 the fellowship of the ring eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends of them. Therewerealsomanyfamiliesofhobbitsinthe Bree-land; andtheyclaimedtobetheoldestsettlementof Hobbitsinthe world, one that was founded long before even the Brandy- winewascrossedandthe Shirecolonized.Theylivedmostly in Staddle though there were some in Bree itself, especially onthehigherslopesofthehill,abovethehousesofthe Men. The Big Folkandthe Little Folk(astheycalledoneanother) were on friendly terms, minding their own affairs in their ownways,butbothrightlyregardingthemselvesasnecessary parts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found. The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel much; and the affairs of the four villages were their chief concern. Occasionally the Hobbits of Bree went as far as Buckland,orthe Eastfarthing;butthoughtheirlittlelandwas not much further than a day’s riding east of the Brandywine Bridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom visited it. An occasional Bucklanderoradventurous Tookwouldcomeout to the Inn for a night or two, but even that was becoming less and less usual. The Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond the borders, as Outsiders, and took very little interest in them, considering them dull and uncouth. There were probably many more Outsiders scattered about in the West of the World in those daysthanthepeopleofthe Shireimagined.Some,doubtless, were no better than tramps, ready to dig a hole in any bank and stay only as long as it suited them. But in the Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and prosperous, and no more rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten that there had been a time when there was much coming and going between the Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts. Thevillageof Breehadsomehundredstonehousesofthe Big Folk,mostlyabovethe Road,nestlingonthehillsidewith
at the sign of the prancing pony 197 windows looking west. On that side, running in more than halfacirclefromthehillandbacktoit,therewasadeepdike with a thick hedge on the inner side. Over this the Road crossed bya causeway;but whereit piercedthe hedgeit was barredbyagreatgate.Therewasanothergateinthesouthern cornerwherethe Roadranoutofthevillage.Thegateswere closed at nightfall; but just inside them were small lodges for the gatekeepers. Downonthe Road,whereitswepttotherighttogoround the foot of the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways; another ancient roadcrossedthe East Roadjustoutsidethedikeatthewestern end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News from Bree was still a saying in the Eastfarthing, descending from those days, when news from North, South, and East could be heard in the inn, and when the Shire-hobbits used to go more often to hear it. But the Northern Lands hadlongbeendesolate,andthe North Roadwasnowseldom used: it was grass-grown, and the Bree-folk called it the Greenway. The Innof Breewasstillthere,however,andtheinnkeeper was an important person. His house was a meeting place for theidle,talkative,andinquisitiveamongtheinhabitants,large and small, of the four villages; and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly dwarves) as stilljourneyedonthe East Road,toandfromthe Mountains. Itwasdark,andwhitestarswereshining,when Frodoand his companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drewnearthevillage.Theycametothe West-gateandfound it shut; but at the door of the lodge beyond it, there was a man sitting.He jumpedup and fetcheda lanternand looked over the gate at them in surprise. ‘What do you want, and where do you come from?’ he asked gruffly.
198 the fellowship of the ring ‘We are making for the inn here,’ answered Frodo. ‘We are journeying east and cannot go further tonight.’ ‘Hobbits!Fourhobbits!Andwhat’smore,outofthe Shire by their talk,’ said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to himself. He stared at them darkly for a moment, and then slowly opened the gate and let them ride through. ‘Wedon’toftensee Shire-folkridingonthe Roadatnight,’ he went on, as they halted a moment by his door. ‘You’ll pardon my wondering what business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?’ ‘Our names and our business are our own, and this does notseemagoodplacetodiscussthem,’said Frodo,notliking the look of the man or the tone of his voice. ‘Your business is your own, no doubt,’ said the man; ‘but it’s my business to ask questions after nightfall.’ ‘We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and to stay at the inn here,’ put in Merry. ‘I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had heard.’ ‘Allright,allright!’ saidtheman.‘Imeantno offence.But you’ll find maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate willbeaskingyouquestions.There’squeerfolkabout.Ifyou go on to The Pony, you’ll find you’re not the only guests.’ He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see in the lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them curiously. He was glad to hear the gate clang to behind them, as they rode forward. He wondered why the manwassosuspicious,andwhetheranyonehadbeenasking for news of a party of hobbits. Could it have been Gandalf? Hemighthavearrived,whiletheyweredelayedinthe Forest andthe Downs.Buttherewassomethinginthelookandthe voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy. The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then hewent backtohis house.Assoon ashisback wasturned,a dark figure climbed quickly in over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street. * * *
at the sign of the prancing pony 199 The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few detached houses, and drew up outside the inn. The houses lookedlargeandstrangetothem.Samstaredupattheinnwith its three storeys and many windows, and felt his heart sink. Hehadimaginedhimselfmeetinggiantstallerthantrees,and othercreaturesevenmoreterrifying,sometimeorotherinthe courseofhisjourney; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of Men and their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring day. He pictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows. ‘We surely aren’t going to stay here for the night, are we, sir?’ he exclaimed. ‘If there are hobbit-folk in these parts, why don’t we look for some that would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.’ ‘What’s wrong with the inn?’ said Frodo. ‘Tom Bombadil recommended it. I expect it’s homelike enough inside.’ Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes. It had a front on the Road, and two wings running back on land partly cut out of the lower slopes of the hill, so that at the rear the second-floor windows were level with the ground. There was a wide arch leading to a courtyard between the two wings, and on the left under the archtherewasalargedoorwayreachedbyafewbroadsteps. The door was open and light streamed out of it. Above the arch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a large sign- board: a fat white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the door was painted in white letters: the prancing pony by barliman butterbur.Manyofthelowerwindowsshowed lights behind thick curtains. As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singingamerrysonginside,andmanycheerfulvoicesjoined loudlyinthechorus.Theylistenedtothisencouragingsound for a moment and then got off their ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping. They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them standing in the yard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went
200 the fellowship of the ring forward and nearly bumped into a short fat man with a bald head and a red face. He had a white apron on, and was bustling out of one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden with full mugs. ‘Can we——’ began Frodo. ‘Half a minute, if you please!’ shouted the man over his shoulder, and vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out again, wiping his hands on his apron. ‘Goodevening,littlemaster!’hesaid,bendingdown.‘What may you be wanting?’ ‘Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies, if that can be managed. Are you Mr. Butterbur?’ ‘That’sright!Barlimanismyname.Barliman Butterburat your service! You’re from the Shire, eh?’ he said, and then suddenly he clapped his hand to his forehead, as if trying to remember something. ‘Hobbits!’ he cried. ‘Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sirs?’ ‘Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,’ said Frodo; ‘and this is Sam Gamgee. My name is Underhill.’ ‘Therenow!’said Mr.Butterbur,snappinghisfingers.‘It’s gone again! But it’ll come back, when I have time to think. I’m run off my feet; but I’ll see what I can do for you. We don’t often get a party out of the Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is such a crowd already in the house tonight as there hasn’t been for long enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree.’ ‘Hi! Nob!’ he shouted. ‘Where are you, you woolly-footed slowcoach? Nob!’ ‘Coming, sir! Coming!’ A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out of a door, and seeing the travellers, stopped short and stared at them with great interest. ‘Where’s Bob?’askedthelandlord.‘Youdon’tknow?Well, find him! Double sharp! I haven’t got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there’s five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.’ Nob trotted off with a grin and a wink.
at the sign of the prancing pony 201 ‘Well now, what was I going to say?’ said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his forehead. ‘One thing drives out another, so to speak.I’mthatbusytonight,myheadisgoinground.There’s a party that came up the Greenway from down South last night – and that was strange enough to begin with. Then there’s a travelling company of dwarves going West come in this evening. And now there’s you. If you weren’t hobbits, I doubt if we could house you. But we’ve got a room or two in the north wing that were made special for hobbits, when this place was built. On the ground floor as they usually prefer;roundwindowsandallastheylikeit.Ihopeyou’llbe comfortable. You’ll be wanting supper, I don’t doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!’ He led them a short way down a passage, and opened a door. ‘Here is a nice little parlour!’ he said. ‘I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I’m that busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It’s hard work for two legs, but I don’t get thinner.I’lllookinagainlater.Ifyouwantanything,ringthe hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don’t come, ring and shout!’ Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemed capable of an endless stream of talk, however busyhemightbe.Theyfoundthemselvesinasmallandcosy room. There was a bit of bright fire burning on the hearth, and in front of it were some low and comfortable chairs. There was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, andonitwasalargehand-bell.But Nob,thehobbitservant, came bustling in long before they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates. ‘Willyoubewantinganythingtodrink,masters?’heasked. ‘And shall I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?’ They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer when Mr. Butterbur and Nob came in again. In a twinklingthetablewaslaid.Therewashotsoup,coldmeats, a blackberry tart, new loaves, slabs of butter, and half a ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could show,
202 the fellowship of the ring and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam’s misgivings (already much relieved by the excellence of the beer). Thelandlordhoveredroundforalittle,andthenprepared to leave them. ‘I don’t know whether you would care to join the company, when you have supped,’ he said, standing at the door. ‘Perhaps you would rather go to your beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you, if you had a mind. We don’t get Outsiders – travellers from the Shire,Ishouldsay,beggingyourpardon–often;andwe like to hear a bit of news, or any story or song you may have in mind. But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack anything!’ So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their supper (about three quarters of an hour’s steady going, not hindered by unnecessary talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it would be too stuffy. ‘I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit, and perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs,and don’tforget thatyouare supposedtobe escapingin secret, and are still on the high-road and not very far from the Shire!’ ‘Allright!’said Pippin.‘Mindyourself!Don’tgetlost,and don’t forget that it is safer indoors!’ The company was in the big common-room of the inn. The gathering was large and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used to the light. This came chiefly from ablazinglog-fire,forthethreelampshangingfromthebeams were dim, and half veiled in smoke. Barliman Butterbur was standingnearthefire,talkingtoacoupleofdwarvesandone or two strange-looking men. On the benches were various folk: men of Bree, a collection of local hobbits (sitting chattering together), a few more dwarves, and other vague figuresdifficulttomakeoutawayintheshadowsandcorners. As soon as the Shire-hobbits entered, there was a chorus of welcome from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that had come up the Greenway, stared at them
at the sign of the prancing pony 203 curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to the Bree-folk, so quickly that, though they caught many names, theywereseldomsurewhothenamesbelongedto.The Men of Breeseemedalltohaveratherbotanical(andtothe Shire- folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight, Goatleaf, Heather- toes, Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mention Butterbur). Some of the hobbits had similar names. The Mugworts,forinstance,seemednumerous.Butmostofthem had natural names, such as Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes, Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of which were used in the Shire. There were several Underhills from Staddle, and as theycouldnotimaginesharinganamewithoutbeingrelated, they took Frodo to their hearts as a long-lost cousin. The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, and Frodosoonfoundthatsomeexplanationofwhathewas doing would have to be given. He gave out that he was interestedinhistoryandgeography(atwhichtherewasmuch wagging of heads, although neither of these words were much used in the Bree-dialect). He said he was thinking of writing a book (at which there was silent astonishment), and that he and his friends wanted to collect information about hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in the eastern lands. At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really wanted to write a book, and had had many ears, he would have learned enough for several chapters in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given a whole list of names, beginning with ‘Old Barliman here’, to whom he could go for further information. But after a time, as Frodo did not show any sign of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about doings in the Shire.Frododidnotproveverycommunicative,andhesoon found himself sitting alone in a corner, listening and looking around. The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant eventsandtellingnewsofakindthatwasbecomingonlytoo familiar.Therewastroubleawayinthe South,anditseemed
204 the fellowship of the ring that the Men who had come up the Greenway were on the move, looking for lands where they could find some peace. The Bree-folk were sympathetic, but plainly not very ready to take a large number of strangers into their little land. One of the travellers, a squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was fore- tellingthatmoreandmorepeoplewouldbecomingnorthin the near future. ‘If room isn’t found for them, they’ll find it for themselves. They’ve a right to live, same as other folk,’ he said loudly. The local inhabitants did not look pleased at the prospect. The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, as it did not at the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk could hardly beg for lodgings in hobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and Pippin, who were now feeling quite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in the Shire.Pippinrousedagooddealoflaughterwithanaccount of the collapse of the roof of the Town Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out like a floured dumpling. But there were several questions asked that made Frodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree- landers, who seemed to have been in the Shire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who they were related to. Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather- beaten man, sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also listening intently to the hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard in frontofhim,andwassmokingalong-stemmedpipecuriously carved.Hislegswerestretchedoutbeforehim,showinghigh boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much wear and were now caked with mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-green cloth was drawn close about him, and in spite of the heat of the room he wore a hood that overshadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could be seen as he watched the hobbits. ‘Whoisthat?’Frodoasked,whenhegotachancetowhis- per to Mr. Butterbur. ‘I don’t think you introduced him?’
at the sign of the prancing pony 205 ‘Him?’ said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking an eye without turning his head. ‘I don’t rightly know. He is oneofthewanderingfolk–Rangerswecallthem.Heseldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he pops up again. He was in and out pretty often last spring; but I haven’t seen him about lately. What his right name is I’veneverheard:buthe’sknownroundhereas Strider.Goes aboutatagreatpaceonhislongshanks;thoughhedon’ttell nobodywhatcausehehastohurry.Butthere’snoaccounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should askabouthim.’Butatthatmoment Mr.Butterburwascalled awaybyademandformorealeandhislastremarkremained unexplained. Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had heard or guessed all that had been said. Presently, with awaveofhishandandanod,heinvited Frodotocomeover and sit by him. As Frodo drew near he threw back his hood, showinga shaggyhead ofdark hairfleckedwith grey,and in a pale stern face a pair of keen grey eyes. ‘I am called Strider,’ he said in a low voice. ‘I am very pleasedtomeetyou,Master–Underhill,ifold Butterburgot your name right.’ ‘He did,’ said Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under the stare of those keen eyes. ‘Well, Master Underhill,’ said Strider, ‘if I were you, I shouldstopyouryoungfriendsfromtalkingtoomuch.Drink, fire,andchance-meetingarepleasantenough,but,well–this isn’t the Shire. There are queer folk about. Though I say it as shouldn’t, you may think,’ he added with a wry smile, seeing Frodo’s glance. ‘And there have been even stranger travellers through Bree lately,’ he went on, watching Frodo’s face. Frodoreturnedhisgazebutsaidnothing;and Stridermade nofurthersign.Hisattentionseemedsuddenlytobefixedon Pippin.Tohisalarm Frodobecameawarethattheridiculous
206 the fellowship of the ring young Took,encouragedbyhissuccesswiththefat Mayorof Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic account of Bilbo’s farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance. Frodowasannoyed.Itwasaharmlessenoughtaleformost of the localhobbits, no doubt: just a funnystory about those funny people away beyond the River; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and had prob- ably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo’s vanishing. It wouldbringthenameof Bagginstotheirminds,especiallyif there had been inquiries in Bree after that name. Frodo fidgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evi- dently much enjoying the attention he was getting, and had become quite forgetful of their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous. ‘Youhadbetterdosomethingquick!’whispered Striderin his ear. Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. The attention of Pippin’s audience was disturbed. Some of thehobbitslookedat Frodoandlaughedandclapped,think- ing that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as was good for him. Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as was his habit when making a speech) fingering the things in his pocket. He felt the Ring on its chain, and quite unac- countably the desire came over him to slip it on and vanish out of the silly situation. It seemed to him, somehow, as if the suggestion came to him from outside, from someone or something in the room. He resisted the temptation firmly, and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At any rate it gave him no inspiration. He spoke ‘a few suitable words’, as they would have said in the Shire: We are all very much gratified by the kindness of your reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will help to renew the old ties of
at the sign of the prancing pony 207 friendship between the Shire and Bree; and then he hesitated and coughed. Everyone in the room was now looking at him. ‘A song!’ shouted one of the hobbits. ‘A song! A song!’ shouted all the others. ‘Come on now, master, sing us something that we haven’t heard before!’ For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began a ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of(andindeedratherproudof,forhehadmadeupthewords himself). It was about an inn; and that is probably why it came into Frodo’s mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a few words of it are now, as a rule, remembered. There is an inn, a merry old inn beneath an old grey hill, And there they brew a beer so brown That the Man in the Moon himself came down one night to drink his fill. The ostler has a tipsy cat that plays a five-stringed fiddle; And up and down he runs his bow, Now squeaking high, now purring low, now sawing in the middle. The landlord keeps a little dog that is mighty fond of jokes; When there’s good cheer among the guests, He cocks an ear at all the jests and laughs until he chokes. They also keep a horne´d cow as proud as any queen; But music turns her head like ale, And makes her wave her tufted tail and dance upon the green.
208 the fellowship of the ring And O! the rows of silver dishes and the store of silver spoons! For Sunday* there’s a special pair, And these they polish up with care on Saturday afternoons. The Man in the Moon was drinking deep, and the cat began to wail; A dish and a spoon on the table danced, The cow in the garden madly pranced, and the little dog chased his tail. The Man in the Moon took another mug, and then rolled beneath his chair; And there he dozed and dreamed of ale, Till in the sky the stars were pale, and dawn was in the air. Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat: ‘The white horses of the Moon, They neigh and champ their silver bits; But their master’s been and drowned his wits, and the Sun’ll be rising soon!’ So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle, a jig that would wake the dead: He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune, While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon: ‘It’s after three!’ he said. They rolled the Man slowly up the hill and bundled him into the Moon, While his horses galloped up in rear, And the cow came capering like a deer, and a dish ran up with the spoon. * Seenote2,III,p.1462
at the sign of the prancing pony 209 Now quicker the fiddle went deedle-dum-diddle; the dog began to roar, The cow and the horses stood on their heads; The guests all bounded from their beds and danced upon the floor. With a ping and a pong the fiddle-strings broke! the cow jumped over the Moon, And the little dog laughed to see such fun, And the Saturday dish went off at a run with the silver Sunday spoon. The round Moon rolled behind the hill as the Sun raised up her head. She* hardly believed her fiery eyes; For though it was day, to her surprise they all went back to bed! There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good voice, and thesong tickled their fancy.‘Where’s old Barley?’ they cried. ‘He ought to hear this. Bob ought to learn his cat thefiddle,andthenwe’dhaveadance.’Theycalledformore ale, and began to shout: ‘Let’s have it again, master! Come on now! Once more!’ They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his song again, while many of them joined in; for the tune was well known, andthey were quick at picking upwords. It was now Frodo’s turn to feel pleased with himself. He capered about on the table; and when he came a second time to the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously;forhecamedown,bang,intoatrayfullofmugs, and slipped, and rolled off the table with a crash, clatter, and bump! The audience all opened their mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short in gaping silence; for the singer * Elves(and Hobbits)alwaysrefertothe Sunas She.
210 the fellowship of the ring disappeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the floor without leaving a hole! The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang totheirfeetandshoutedfor Barliman.Allthecompanydrew awayfrom Pippinand Sam,whofoundthemselvesleftalone in a corner, and eyed darkly and doubtfully from a distance. It was plain that many people regarded them now as the companionsofatravellingmagicianofunknownpowersand purpose. But there was one swarthy Bree-lander, who stood lookingatthemwithaknowingandhalf-mockingexpression thatmadethemfeelveryuncomfortable.Presentlyheslipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had been whispering together a good deal during the evening. Frodofeltafool.Notknowingwhatelsetodo,hecrawled away under the tables to the dark corner by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of his thoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall and took off the Ring. How it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he had been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and that somehow it had slipped on when he stuck out his hand with ajerktosavehisfall.Foramomenthewonderedifthe Ring itselfhadnotplayedhimatrick;perhapsithadtriedtoreveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt in theroom.Hedidnotlikethelooksofthementhathadgone out. ‘Well?’said Strider,whenhereappeared.‘Whydidyoudo that?Worsethananythingyourfriendscouldhavesaid!You have put your foot in it! Or should I say your finger?’ ‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed. ‘Ohyes,youdo,’answered Strider;‘butwehadbetterwait until the uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. Baggins, I should like a quiet word with you.’ ‘Whatabout?’asked Frodo,ignoringthesuddenuseofhis proper name. ‘A matter of some importance – to us both,’ answered
at the sign of the prancing pony 211 Strider, looking Frodo in the eye. ‘You may hear something to your advantage.’ ‘Verywell,’said Frodo,tryingtoappearunconcerned.‘I’ll talk to you later.’ Meanwhileanargumentwasgoingonbythefireplace.Mr. Butterbur had come trotting in, and he was now trying to listen to several conflicting accounts of the event at the same time. ‘I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,’ said a hobbit; ‘or leastways I didn’tseehim,ifyoutakemymeaning.Hejustvanishedinto thin air, in a manner of speaking.’ ‘You don’t say, Mr. Mugwort!’ said the landlord, looking puzzled. ‘Yes I do!’ replied Mugwort. ‘And I mean what I say, what’s more.’ ‘There’s some mistake somewhere,’ said Butterbur, shak- ing his head. ‘There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing into thin air; or into thick air, as is more likely in this room.’ ‘Well, where is he now?’ cried several voices. ‘How should I know? He’s welcome to go where he will, so long as he pays in the morning. There’s Mr. Took, now: he’s not vanished.’ ‘Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn’t,’ said Mugwort obstinately. ‘And I say there’s some mistake,’ repeated Butterbur, picking up the tray and gathering up the broken crockery. ‘Of course there’s a mistake!’ said Frodo. ‘I haven’t van- ished. Here I am! I’ve just been having a few words with Strider in the corner.’ He came forward into the firelight; but most of the com- pany backed away, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly under the tables after he had fallen. Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then and thereinahuff,havingnofancyforfurtherentertainmentthat
212 the fellowship of the ring evening. One or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves. The Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said good nighttothelandlord,butnotto Frodoandhisfriends.Before long no one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall. Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned, very probably, that his house would be full again on many future nights, until the present mystery had been thoroughly discussed. ‘Now what have you been doing, Mr. Underhill?’ he asked. ‘Frightening my customers and breaking up my crocks with your acrobatics!’ ‘I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,’ said Frodo. ‘Itwas quiteunintentional, Iassure you.Amost unfortunate accident.’ ‘All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you’re going to do any more tumbling, or conjuring, or whatever it was, you’d best warn folk beforehand – and warn me. We’re a bit suspicious round here of anything out of the way – uncanny, if you understand me; and we don’t take to it all of a sudden.’ ‘Ishan’tbedoinganythingofthesortagain,Mr.Butterbur, I promise you. And now I think I’ll be getting to bed. We shall be making an early start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight o’clock?’ ‘Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with youinprivate,Mr.Underhill.Somethinghasjustcomeback to my mind that I ought to tell you. I hope that you’ll not take it amiss. When I’ve seen to a thing or two, I’ll come along to your room, if you’re willing.’ ‘Certainly!’ said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered how many private talks he would have before he got to bed, and what they would reveal. Were these people all in league against him? He began to suspect even old Butterbur’s fat face of concealing dark designs.
Chapter 10 STRIDER Frodo,Pippin, and Sammade theirwayback totheparlour. There was no light. Merry was not there, and the fire had burned low. It was not until they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots that they discovered Striderhadcomewiththem.Therehewascalmly sitting in a chair by the door! ‘Hallo!’said Pippin.‘Whoareyou,andwhatdoyouwant?’ ‘I am called Strider,’ he answered; ‘and though he may have forgotten it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.’ ‘You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,’ said Frodo. ‘What have you to say?’ ‘Several things,’ answered Strider. ‘But, of course, I have my price.’ ‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo sharply. ‘Don’t be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what I know, and give you some good advice – but I shall want a reward.’ ‘And what will that be, pray?’ said Frodo. He suspected now that he had fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably that he had brought only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he could not spare any of it. ‘No more than you can afford,’ answered Strider with a slow smile, as if he guessed Frodo’s thoughts. ‘Just this: you must take me along with you, until I wish to leave you.’ ‘Oh, indeed!’ replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. ‘Even if I wanted another companion, I should not agreetoanysuchthing,until Iknewagooddealmoreabout you, and your business.’
214 the fellowship of the ring ‘Excellent!’ exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting back comfortably. ‘You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, when you have heard me.’ ‘Go on then!’ said Frodo. ‘What do you know?’ ‘Too much; too many dark things,’ said Strider grimly. ‘But as for your business——’ He got up and went to the door, opened it quickly and looked out. Then he shut it quietly and sat down again. ‘I have quick ears,’ he went on, lowering his voice, ‘and though I cannot disappear, I have hunted many wild and wary things and I can usually avoid being seen, if I wish. Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four hobbits came out of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to old Bombadilortooneanother;butonethinginterestedme. Pleaseremember,saidoneofthem,thatthename Bagginsmust not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given.Thatinterestedmesomuchthat Ifollowedthemhere. Islippedoverthegatejustbehindthem.Maybe Mr.Baggins has an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but if so, I should advise him and his friends to be more careful.’ ‘Idon’tseewhatinterestmynamehasforanyonein Bree,’ said Frodo angrily, ‘and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr. Strider may have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but if so, I should advise him to explain it.’ ‘Wellanswered!’said Striderlaughing.‘Buttheexplanation is simple: I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wantedtofindhimquickly.Ihadlearnedthathewascarrying out of the Shire, well, a secret that concerned me and my friends. ‘Now, don’t mistake me!’ he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam jumped up with a scowl. ‘I shall take more careofthesecretthanyoudo.Andcareisneeded!’Heleaned forward and looked at them. ‘Watch every shadow!’ he said in a low voice. ‘Black horsemen have passed through Bree.
strider 215 On Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared later, coming up the Greenway from the south.’ There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam:‘Ioughttohaveguesseditfromthewaythegatekeeper greeted us,’ he said. ‘And the landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join the company? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have stayed quiet in here.’ ‘It would have been better,’ said Strider. ‘I would have stopped your going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me in to see you, or take a message.’ ‘Do you think he——’ began Frodo. ‘No,Idon’tthinkanyharmofold Butterbur.Onlyhedoes not altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort.’ Frodo gave him a puzzled look. ‘Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?’ said Strider with a curl of his lip and a queer gleaminhiseye.‘But Ihopeweshallgettoknowoneanother better. When we do, I hope you will explain what happened at the end of your song. For that little prank——’ ‘It was sheer accident!’ interrupted Frodo. ‘Iwonder,’said Strider.‘Accident,then.Thataccidenthas made your position dangerous.’ ‘Hardly more than it was already,’ said Frodo. ‘I knew these horsemen were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to have gone away.’ ‘You must not count on that!’ said Strider sharply. ‘They will return. And more are coming. There are others. I know their number. I know these Riders.’ He paused, and his eyes were cold and hard. ‘And there are some folk in Bree who are not to be trusted,’ he went on. ‘Bill Ferny, for instance. He has an evil name in the Bree-land, and queer folk call at his house. You must have noticed him among the company: a swarthy sneering fellow. He was very close with one of the Southern strangers, and they slipped out together just after
216 the fellowship of the ring your‘‘accident’’.Notallofthose Southernersmeanwell;and as for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody; or make mischief for amusement.’ ‘What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?’ said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider’s hints. ‘News of you, of course,’ answered Strider. ‘An account of your performance would be very interesting to certain people.Afterthattheywouldhardlyneedtobetoldyourreal name. It seems to me only too likely that they will hear of it before this night is over. Is that enough? You can do as you like about my reward: take me as a guide or not. But I may saythat Iknowallthelandsbetweenthe Shireandthe Misty Mountains, for I have wandered over them for many years. I am older than I look. I might prove useful. You will have to leave the open road after tonight; for the horsemen will watch it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and be allowed to go forward while the Sun is up; but you won’t go far. They will come on you in the wild, in some dark place wherethere isno help.Do youwishthem tofind you?They are terrible!’ The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his face was drawn as if with pain, and his hands clenched the arms of his chair. The room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening to sounds in the Night far away. ‘There!’ he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across his brow. ‘Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do. You fear them, but you do not fear them enough, yet. Tomorrow you will have to escape, if you can. Strider cantakeyoubypathsthatareseldomtrodden.Willyouhave him?’ There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer; his mind was confused with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master; and at last he broke out: ‘Withyourleave,Mr.Frodo,I’dsayno!This Striderhere,
strider 217 hewarnsandhesaystakecare;and Isayyestothat,andlet’s beginwithhim.Hecomesoutofthe Wild,and Ineverheard no good of such folk. He knows something, that’s plain, and more than I like; but it’s no reason why we should let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he puts it.’ Pippinfidgetedandlookeduncomfortable.Striderdidnot reply to Sam, but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away. ‘No,’ he said slowly. ‘I don’t agree. I think, I think you are not really as you choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don’t see why you should warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise? Who are you? What do you really know about – about my business; and how do you know it?’ ‘The lesson in caution has been well learned,’ said Strider with a grim smile. ‘But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get to Rivendell now on your own, andtotrustmeisyouronlychance.Youmustmakeupyour mind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will help you to do so. But why should you believe my story, if you do not trust me already? Still here it is——’ At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterburhadarrivedwithcandles,andbehindhimwas Nob with cans of hot water. Strider withdrew into a dark corner. ‘I’vecometobidyougoodnight,’saidthelandlord,putting thecandlesonthetable.‘Nob!Takethewatertotherooms!’ He came in and shut the door. ‘It’slikethis,’hebegan,hesitatingandlookingtroubled.‘If I’ve done any harm, I’m sorry indeed. But one thing drives outanother,asyou’lladmit;and I’mabusyman.Butfirstone thingandthenanotherthisweekhavejoggedmymemory,as thesayinggoes;andnottoolate Ihope.Yousee,Iwasasked tolook outforhobbits ofthe Shire, andforone bythename of Baggins in particular.’
218 the fellowship of the ring ‘And what has that got to do with me?’ asked Frodo. ‘Ah!youknowbest,’saidthelandlord,knowingly.‘Iwon’t give you away; but I was told that this Baggins would be goingbythenameof Underhill,and Iwasgivenadescription that fits you well enough, if I may say so.’ ‘Indeed! Let’s have it then!’ said Frodo, unwisely inter- rupting. ‘A stout little fellow with red cheeks,’ said Mr. Butterbur solemnly. Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. ‘That won’thelpyoumuch;itgoesformosthobbits,Barley,hesaysto me,’ continued Mr. Butterbur with a glance at Pippin. ‘But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your pardon, but he said it, not me.’ ‘He said it? And who was he?’ asked Frodo eagerly. ‘Ah!Thatwas Gandalf,ifyouknowwho Imean.Awizard theysayheis,buthe’sagoodfriendofmine,whetherorno. But now I don’t know what he’ll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into a block of wood, I shouldn’twonder.He’sabithasty.Stillwhat’sdonecan’tbe undone.’ ‘Well, what have you done?’ said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow unravelling of Butterbur’s thoughts. ‘Wherewas I?’saidthelandlord,pausingandsnappinghis fingers.‘Ah,yes!Old Gandalf.Threemonthsbackhewalked right into my room without a knock. Barley, he says, I’m off in the morning. Will you do something for me? You’ve only to nameit,Isaid.I’minahurry,saidhe,and I’venotimemyself, but I want a message took to the Shire. Have you anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I said, tomorrow, maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow, he says, and then he gave me a letter. ‘It’s addressed plain enough,’ said Mr. Butterbur, pro- ducing a letter from his pocket, and reading out the address slowly and proudly (he valued his reputation as a lettered man):
strider 219 Mr. FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE. ‘A letter for me from Gandalf!’ cried Frodo. ‘Ah!’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘Then your right name is Baggins?’ ‘It is,’ said Frodo, ‘and you had better give me that letter at once, and explain why you never sent it. That’s what you came to tell me, I suppose, though you’ve taken a long time to come to the point.’ Poor Mr.Butterburlookedtroubled.‘You’reright,master,’ he said, ‘and I beg your pardon. And I’m mortal afraid of what Gandalf will say, if harm comes of it. But I didn’t keep it back a-purpose. I put it by safe. Then I couldn’t find nobodywillingtogotothe Shirenextday,northedayafter, and none of my own folk were to spare; and then one thing after another drove it out of my mind. I’m a busy man. I’ll do what I can to set matters right, and if there’s any help I can give, you’ve only to name it. ‘Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley,hesaystome,thisfriendofminefromthe Shire,hemay be coming out this way before long, him and another. He’ll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that! But you need ask no questions. And if I’m not with him, he may be in trouble, and he mayneedhelp.Dowhateveryoucanforhim,and I’llbegrateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.’ ‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo. ‘These black men,’ said the landlord lowering his voice. ‘They’relookingfor Baggins,andiftheymeanwell,then I’m ahobbit.Itwason Monday,andallthedogswereyammering andthegeesescreaming.Uncanny,Icalledit.Nob,hecame and told me that two black men were at the door asking for a hobbit called Baggins. Nob’s hair was all stood on end. I bid the black fellows be off, and slammed the door on them; but they’ve been asking the same question all the way to Archet, I hear. And that Ranger, Strider, he’s been asking
220 the fellowship of the ring questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you, before you’d had bite or sup, he did.’ ‘He did!’ said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light. ‘And much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.’ The landlord jumped with surprise. ‘You!’ he cried. ‘You’re always popping up. What do you want now?’ ‘He’s here with my leave,’ said Frodo. ‘He came to offer me his help.’ ‘Well, you know your own business, maybe,’ said Mr. Butterbur, looking suspiciously at Strider. ‘But if I was in your plight, I wouldn’t take up with a Ranger.’ ‘Then who would you take up with?’ asked Strider. ‘A fat innkeeperwhoonlyremembershisownnamebecausepeople shout it at him all day? They cannot stay in The Pony for ever,andtheycannotgohome.Theyhavealongroadbefore them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?’ ‘Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn’t do that for any money,’ said Mr.Butterbur,lookingreallyscared.‘Butwhycan’tyoustay here quiet for a bit, Mr. Underhill? What are all these queer goings on? What are these black men after, and where do they come from, I’d like to know?’ ‘I’msorry Ican’texplainitall,’answered Frodo.‘Iamtired andveryworried,andit’salongtale.Butifyoumeantohelp me,Ioughttowarnyouthatyouwillbeindangeraslongas I am in your house. These Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from——’ ‘They come from Mordor,’ said Strider in a low voice. ‘From Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.’ ‘Save us!’ cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evi- dently was known to him. ‘That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.’ ‘It is,’ said Frodo. ‘Are you still willing to help me?’ ‘I am,’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘More than ever. Though I don’t knowwhat the likes ofme can doagainst, against——’ he faltered. ‘Againstthe Shadowinthe East,’said Striderquietly.‘Not
strider 221 much, Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here tonight, as Mr. Underhill; and you can forget the name of Baggins, till he is far away.’ ‘I’ll do that,’ said Butterbur. ‘But they’ll find out he’s here without help from me, I’m afraid. It’s a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself this evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo’s going off has been heard before tonightin Bree.Evenour Nobhasbeendoingsomeguessing in his slow pate; and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he is.’ ‘Well, we can only hope the Riders won’t come back yet,’ said Frodo. ‘I hope not, indeed,’ said Butterbur. ‘But spooks or no spooks,theywon’tgetin The Ponysoeasy.Don’tyouworry tillthemorning.Nob’llsaynoword.Noblackmanshallpass mydoors,while Icanstandonmylegs.Meandmyfolk’llkeep watchtonight;butyouhadbestgetsomesleep,ifyoucan.’ ‘In any case we must be called at dawn,’ said Frodo. ‘We mustgetoffasearlyaspossible.Breakfastatsix-thirty,please.’ ‘Right!I’llseetotheorders,’saidthelandlord.‘Goodnight, Mr. Baggins – Underhill, I should say! Good night – now, bless me! Where’s your Mr. Brandybuck?’ ‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgottenallabout Merry,anditwasgettinglate.‘Iamafraid he is out. He said something about going fora breath of air.’ ‘Well,youdowantlookingafterandnomistake:yourparty might be on a holiday!’ said Butterbur. ‘I must go and bar the doors quick, but I’ll see your friend is let in when he comes. I’d better send Nob to look for him. Good night to youall!’Atlast Mr.Butterburwentout,withanotherdoubt- ful look at Strider and a shake of his head. His footsteps retreated down the passage. ‘Well?’said Strider.‘Whenareyougoingtoopenthatletter?’ Frodolookedcarefullyatthesealbeforehebrokeit.Itseemed certainly to be Gandalf’s. Inside, written in the wizard’s strong but graceful script, was the following message:
222 the fellowship of the ring THEPRANCINGPONY,BREE.Midyear’s Day,Shire Year, 1418. Dear Frodo, Badnewshasreachedmehere.Imustgooffatonce.Youhad betterleave Bag Endsoon,andgetoutofthe Shirebeforetheend of July at latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I find that you are gone. Leave a message for me here, if you pass through Bree. You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). Youmaymeetafriendofmineonthe Road:a Man,lean,dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business and will help you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I do not come, Elrond will advise you. Yours in haste GANDALF. PS. Do NOT use It again, not for any reason whatever! Do not travel by night! PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men on the roads. His true name is Aragorn. All that is gold does not glitter, Not all those who wander are lost; The old that is strong does not wither, Deep roots are not reached by the frost. From the ashes a fire shall be woken, A light from the shadows shall spring; Renewed shall be blade that was broken, The crownless again shall be king. PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man, but his memory is like a lumber- room: thing wanted always buried. If he forgets, I shall roast him. Fare Well!
strider 223 Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam. ‘Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!’ he said. ‘He deserves roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he was going into great danger.’ ‘He has been doing that for many years,’ said Strider. Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf’s second postscript. ‘Why didn’t you tell me that you were Gandalf’s friend at once?’ he asked. ‘It would have saved time.’ ‘Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?’ said Strider. ‘I knew nothing of this letter. For all I knew I had to persuade you to trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend to tell you all about myself at once. I had to study you first, and make sure of you. The Enemy has set traps for me before now. As soon as I had made up my mind, I was ready to tell you whatever you asked. But I must admit,’ he added with a queer laugh, ‘that I hoped you would take to me for my own sake. A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and longsforfriendship.Butthere,Ibelievemylooksareagainst me.’ ‘They are – at first sight at any rate,’ laughed Pippin with sudden relief after reading Gandalf’s letter. ‘But handsome is as handsome does, as we say in the Shire; and I daresay weshallalllookmuchthesameafterlyingfordaysinhedges and ditches.’ ‘Itwouldtakemorethanafewdays,orweeks,oryears,of wandering in the Wild to make you look like Strider,’ he answered. ‘And you would die first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.’ Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed Striderdubiously.‘Howdoweknowyouarethe Strider that Gandalf speaks about?’ he demanded. ‘You never men- tioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with
224 the fellowship of the ring you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have you to say to that?’ ‘That you are a stout fellow,’ answered Strider; ‘but I am afraid my only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I could kill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk. If I was after the Ring, I could have it – now!’ He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyesgleamedalight,keenandcommanding.Throwingback his cloak, he laid his hand on the hilt of a sword that had hungconcealedbyhisside.Theydidnotdaretomove.Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly. ‘But I am the real Strider, fortunately,’ he said, looking downatthemwithhisfacesoftenedbyasuddensmile.‘Iam Aragorn son of Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I will.’ There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesita- tion.‘Ibelievedthatyouwereafriendbeforethelettercame,’ he said, ‘or at least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight, but never in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of his spies would – well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.’ ‘I see,’ laughed Strider. ‘I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? Allthatisgolddoesnotglitter,notallthosewhowanderarelost.’ ‘Did the verses apply to you then?’ asked Frodo. ‘I could not make out what they were about. But how did you know that they were in Gandalf’s letter, if you have never seen it?’ ‘I did not know,’ he answered. ‘But I am Aragorn, and those verses go with that name.’ He drew out his sword, and they saw that the blade was indeed broken a foot below the hilt. ‘Not much use is it, Sam?’ said Strider. ‘But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.’ Sam said nothing. ‘Well,’said Strider,‘with Sam’spermissionwewillcallthat settled.Stridershallbeyourguide.Andnow Ithinkitistime you went to bed and took what rest you can. We shall have
strider 225 aroughroadtomorrow.Evenifweareallowedtoleave Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.’ ‘Weathertop?’ said Sam. ‘What’s that?’ ‘It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from here to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have a chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us. After Weathertop our journey will become more difficult, and we shall have to choose between various dangers.’ ‘When did you last see Gandalf?’ asked Frodo. ‘Do you know where he is, or what he is doing?’ Striderlookedgrave.‘Idonotknow,’hesaid.‘Icamewest withhiminthespring.Ihaveoftenkeptwatchontheborders ofthe Shireinthelastfewyears,whenhewasbusyelsewhere. Heseldomleftitunguarded.Welastmetonthefirstof May: at Sarn Ford down the Brandywine. He told me that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for Rivendell in the last week of September. As I knew he was at your side, I went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some news reached him, and I was not at hand to help. ‘I am troubled, for the first time since I have known him. We should have had messages, even if he could not come himself. When I returned, many days ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone far and wide that Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of Gildor that told me this; and later they told me that you had left your home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching the East Road anxiously.’ ‘Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it – with Gandalf’s absence, I mean?’ asked Frodo. ‘I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except the Enemy himself,’ said Strider. ‘But do not
226 the fellowship of the ring give up hope! Gandalf is greater than you Shire-folk know – asaruleyoucanonlyseehisjokesandtoys.Butthisbusiness of ours will be his greatest task.’ Pippin yawned. ‘I am sorry,’ he said, ‘but I am dead tired. In spite of all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in the dark to look for him.’ At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the passage. Merry came in with a rush fol- lowed by Nob. He shut the door hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They stared at him in alarm for a moment before he gasped: ‘I have seen them, Frodo! I have seen them! Black Riders!’ ‘Black Riders!’ cried Frodo. ‘Where?’ ‘Here.Inthevillage.Istayedindoorsforanhour.Thenas you did not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had come back again and was standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a sort of deepershadeamongtheshadowsacrosstheroad,justbeyond the edge of the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was no horse.’ ‘Whichwaydiditgo?’asked Strider,suddenlyandsharply. Merry started, noticing the stranger for the first time. ‘Go on!’ said Frodo. ‘This is a friend of Gandalf’s. I will explain later.’ ‘It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,’ continued Merry. ‘I tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.’ Strider looked at Merry with wonder. ‘You have a stout heart,’ he said; ‘but it was foolish.’ ‘Idon’tknow,’said Merry.‘Neitherbravenorsilly,Ithink. I could hardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow. Anyway, I went, and suddenly I heard voices by the hedge.
strider 227 Onewasmuttering;andtheotherwaswhispering,orhissing. I couldn’t hear a word that was said. I did not creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt terri- fied, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt home, when something came behind me and I ... I fell over.’ ‘I found him, sir,’ put in Nob. ‘Mr. Butterbur sent me out with a lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just nigh Bill Ferny’s house I thought I could see something in the Road. I couldn’t swear to it, but it looked to me as if two men was stooping over something, lifting it. I gave a shout, but when I got up to the spot there wasnosignsofthem,andonly Mr.Brandybucklyingbythe roadside.Heseemedtobeasleep.‘‘Ithought Ihadfalleninto deep water,’’ he says to me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he got up and ran back here like a hare.’ ‘I am afraid that’s true,’ said Merry, ‘though I don’t know what I said. I had an ugly dream, which I can’t remember. I went to pieces. I don’t know what came over me.’ ‘I do,’ said Strider. ‘The Black Breath. The Riders must have left their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably that Southerner wasaspyaswell.Somethingmayhappeninthenight,before we leave Bree.’ ‘Whatwillhappen?’said Merry.‘Willtheyattacktheinn?’ ‘No, I think not,’ said Strider. ‘They are not all here yet. And in any case that is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not openly attack a house where there are lights and many people – not until they are des- perate,notwhileallthelongleaguesof Eriadorstillliebefore us.Buttheirpowerisinterror,andalreadysomein Breeare in their clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of the strangers, and, maybe, the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when they left him.’
228 the fellowship of the ring ‘We seem to have enemies all round,’ said Frodo. ‘What are we to do?’ ‘Stay here, and do not go to your rooms! They are sure to have found out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have windows looking north and close to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door. But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage.’ While Striderwasgone,Frodogave Merryarapidaccount of all that had happened since supper. Merry was still read- ing and pondering Gandalf’s letter when Strider and Nob returned. ‘Well Masters,’ said Nob, ‘I’ve ruffled up the clothes and put in a bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation of your head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag – Underhill, sir,’ he added with a grin. Pippin laughed. ‘Very life-like!’ he said. ‘But what will happen when they have penetrated the disguise?’ ‘We shall see,’ said Strider. ‘Let us hope to hold the fort till morning.’ ‘Good night to you,’ said Nob, and went off to take his part in the watch on the doors. Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They pushed a low chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo saw that the night was still clear. The Sickle*wasswingingbrightabovetheshouldersof Bree-hill. Hethenclosedandbarredtheheavyinsideshuttersanddrew the curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles. The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards the hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask. ‘Jumpedoverthe Moon!’chuckled Merryasherolledhim- selfinhisblanket.‘Veryridiculousofyou,Frodo!But Iwish * The Hobbits’nameforthe Ploughor Great Bear.
strider 229 I had been there to see. The worthies of Bree will be dis- cussing it a hundred years hence.’ ‘I hope so,’ said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one by one the hobbits dropped off to sleep.
Chapter 11 A KNIFE IN THE DARK Astheypreparedforsleepintheinnat Bree,darknesslayon Buckland;amiststrayedinthedellsandalongtheriver-bank. The house at Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered out. A feeling of fear had beengrowingonhimallday,andhewasunabletorestorgo tobed:therewasabroodingthreatinthebreathlessnight-air. Ashestaredoutintothegloom,ablackshadowmovedunder thetrees;thegateseemedtoopenofitsownaccordandclose again without a sound. Terror seized him. He shrank back, and for a moment he stood trembling in the hall. Then he shut and locked the door. The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses ledwithstealthalongthelane.Outsidethegatetheystopped, and three black figures entered, like shades of night creeping across the ground. One went to the door, one to the corner of the house on either side; and there they stood, as still as theshadowsofstones,whilenightwentslowlyon.Thehouse and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly. There was a faint stir in the leaves, and a cock crowed far away. The cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the dark without moon or stars a drawnbladegleamed,asifachilllighthadbeenunsheathed. There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered. ‘Open, in the name of Mordor!’ said a voice thin and menacing. At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst and lock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in. At that moment, among thetrees nearby, a horn rang out. It rent the night like fire on a hill-top.
a knife in the dark 231 awake! fear! fire! foes! awake! Fatty Bolgerhadnotbeenidle.Assoonashesawthedark shapes creep from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish. And run he did, out of the back door, through thegarden,andoverthefields.Whenhereachedthenearest house, more than a mile away, he collapsed on the doorstep. ‘No, no, no!’ he was crying. ‘No, not me! I haven’t got it!’ It was some time before anyone could make out what he was babbling about. At last they got the idea that enemies were in Buckland,somestrangeinvasionfromthe Old Forest.And then they lost no more time. fear! fire! foes! The Brandybuckswereblowingthe Horn-callof Buckland, thathadnotbeensoundedforahundredyears,notsincethe white wolves came in the Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over. awake! awake! Far away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. Theblackfiguresfledfromthehouse.Oneofthemletfall a hobbit-cloak on the step, as he ran. In the lane the noise of hoofs broke out, and gathering to a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there was the sound of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow! Sauron would deal with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they knew now that the house was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down the guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire. * * *
232 the fellowship of the ring In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, asifsomesoundorpresencehaddisturbedhim.Hesawthat Strider was sitting alert in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the fire, which had been tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement. Frodosoonwenttosleepagain;buthisdreamswereagain troubled with the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The wind seemed to be curling round the house and shaking it; and far off he heard a horn blowing wildly. He opened his eyes,andheardacockcrowinglustilyintheinn-yard.Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang.Thefirstgreylightofdaywasintheroom,andacold air was coming through the open window. As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to their bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that theyhadtakenhisadvice:thewindowshadbeenforcedopen and were swinging, and the curtains were flapping; the beds were tossed about, and the bolsters slashed and flung upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces. Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr. Butterburlookedsleepyandfrightened.Hehadhardlyclosed hiseyesallnight(sohesaid),buthehadneverheardasound. ‘Never has such a thing happened in my time!’ he cried, raising his hands in horror. ‘Guests unable to sleep in their beds, and good bolsters ruined and all! What are we coming to?’ ‘Darktimes,’said Strider.‘Butforthepresentyoumaybe left in peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once.Nevermindaboutbreakfast:adrinkandabitestanding will have to do. We shall be packed in a few minutes.’ Mr.Butterburhurried offtoseethat theirponiesweregot ready,andtofetchthema‘bite’.Butverysoonhecameback in dismay. The ponies had vanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in the night, and they were gone: not only Merry’sponies,buteveryotherhorseandbeastintheplace. Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach Rivendellonfoot,pursuedbymountedenemies?They
a knife in the dark 233 might as well set out for the Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was weighing up their strength and courage. ‘Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,’ he said at last, thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. ‘We should not go much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I was going to walk in any case. It is the foodandstoresthattroubleme.Wecannotcountongetting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or forced to go round-about, far out of the direct way. How much are you prepared to carry on your backs?’ ‘As much as we must,’ said Pippin with a sinking heart, but trying to show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt). ‘I can carry enough for two,’ said Sam defiantly. ‘Can’t anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?’ asked Frodo. ‘Can’t we get a couple of ponies in the village, or even one just for the baggage? I don’t suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy them,’ he added, doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it. ‘Idoubtit,’saidthelandlordunhappily.‘Thetwoorthree riding-poniesthattherewerein Breewerestabledinmyyard, and they’re gone. As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or whatnot, there are veryfew of them in Bree, and theywon’tbeforsale.But I’lldowhat Ican.I’llroutout Bob and send him round as soon as may be.’ ‘Yes,’said Striderreluctantly,‘youhadbetterdothat.Iam afraid we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so endsallhopeofstartingearly,andslippingawayquietly!We might as well have blown a horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.’ ‘There is one crumb of comfort,’ said Merry, ‘and more than a crumb, I hope: we can have breakfast while we wait – and sit down to it. Let’s get hold of Nob!’ * * *
234 the fellowship of the ring In the end there was more than three hours’ delay. Bob came back with the report that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money in the neighbourhood – except one: Bill Ferny had one that he might possibly sell. ‘A poor old half-starved creature it is,’ said Bob; ‘but he won’t part with itforlessthanthriceitsworth,seeinghowyou’replaced,not if I knows Bill Ferny.’ ‘Bill Ferny?’ said Frodo. ‘Isn’t there some trick? Wouldn’t thebeastboltbacktohimwithallourstuff,orhelpintracking us, or something?’ ‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘But I cannot imagine any animal running home to him, once it got away. I fancy this is only anafterthoughtofkind Master Ferny’s:justawayofincreas- ing his profits from the affair. The chief danger is that the poor beast is probably at death’s door. But there does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?’ Bill Ferny’s price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed at least three times the pony’s value in those parts. It proved to be a bony, underfed, and dispirited animal; but it did not look like dying just yet. Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry another eighteen pence as some compensation for the lost animals. He was an honest man, andwell-offasthingswerereckonedin Bree;butthirtysilver pennies was a sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear. As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end.Itturnedoutlaterthatonlyonehorsehadbeenactually stolen. The others had been driven off, or had bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different corners of the Bree-land. Merry’s ponies had escaped altogether, and eventually(havingagooddealofsense)theymadetheirway to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well- off.Butwhennewsoftheeventsat Breecameto Tom’sears, hesentthemto Mr.Butterbur,whothusgotfivegoodbeasts at a very fair price. They had to work harder in Bree, but Bobtreatedthemwell;soonthewholetheywerelucky:they
a knife in the dark 235 missed a dark and dangerous journey. But they never came to Rivendell. However,inthe meanwhileforall Mr. Butterburknewhis money was gone for good, or for bad. And he had other troubles. For there was a great commotion as soon as the remaining guests were astir and heard news of the raid on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamedtheinnkeeperloudly,untilitbecameknownthatone oftheirownnumberhadalsodisappearedinthenight,none otherthan Bill Ferny’ssquint-eyedcompanion.Suspicionfell on him at once. ‘If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,’ said Butterbur angrily, ‘you ought to pay for all the damageyourselvesandnotcomeshoutingatme.Goandask Ferny where your handsome friend is!’ But it appeared that hewasnobody’sfriend,andnobodycouldrecollectwhenhe had joined their party. After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get together further supplies for the longer journey they were now expecting. It was close on ten o’clock before they at last got off. By that time the whole of Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo’s vanishing trick; the appearance of the black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as would last for many uneventful years.Mostoftheinhabitantsof Breeand Staddle,andmany even from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road to see the travellers start. The other guests in the inn were at the doors or hanging out of the windows. Strider had changed his mind, and had decided to leave Breebythemainroad.Anyattempttosetoffacrosscountry at once would only make matters worse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to see what they were up to, and to prevent them from trespassing. Theysaid farewellto Noband Bob, andtookleave of Mr. Butterbur with many thanks. ‘I hope we shall meet again
236 the fellowship of the ring some day, when things are merry once more,’ said Frodo. ‘I shouldlikenothingbetterthantostayinyourhouseinpeace for a while.’ They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd. Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted. But Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo; next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony, which was laden with as much of their baggageastheyhadthehearttogiveit;butalreadyitlooked less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its fortunes. Samwaschewinganapplethoughtfully.Hehadapocketfull of them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. ‘Apples for walking,andapipeforsitting,’hesaid.‘But Ireckon I’llmiss them both before long.’ The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped out of doors, or popped over walls and fences, as theypassed.Butastheydrewneartothefurthergate,Frodo sawadarkill-kepthousebehindathickhedge:thelasthouse in the village. In one of the windows he caught a glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once. ‘Sothat’swherethatsouthernerishiding!’hethought.‘He looks more than half like a goblin.’ Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had heavy black brows, and dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curledinasneer.Hewassmokingashortblackpipe.Asthey approached he took it out of his mouth and spat. ‘Morning, Longshanks!’ he said. ‘Off early? Found some friends at last?’ Strider nodded, but did not answer. ‘Morning, my little friends!’ he said to the others. ‘I sup- pose you know who you’ve taken up with? That’s Stick-at- naught Strider, that is! Though I’ve heard other names not so pretty. Watch out tonight! And you, Sammie, don’t go ill-treating my poor old pony! Pah!’ He spat again. Sam turned quickly. ‘And you, Ferny,’ he said, ‘put your uglyfaceoutofsight,oritwillgethurt.’Withasuddenflick,
a knife in the dark 237 quick as lightning, an apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and curses came from behind the hedge. ‘Waste of a good apple,’ said Sam regret- fully, and strode on. At last they left the village behind. The escort of children and stragglers that had followed them got tired and turned back at the South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Roadforsomemiles.Itbenttotheleft,curvingbackinto its eastward line as it rounded the feet of Bree-hill, and then it began to run swiftly downwards into wooded country. To their left they could seesome of the houses and hobbit-holes of Staddle on the gentler south-eastern slopes of the hill; down in a deep hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising smoke that showed where Combe lay; Archet was hidden in the trees beyond. After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill standing tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards the North. ‘This is where we leave the open and take to cover,’ said Strider. ‘Nota‘‘shortcut’’,Ihope,’said Pippin.‘Ourlastshortcut through woods nearly ended in disaster.’ ‘Ah, but you had not got me with you then,’ laughed Strider. ‘My cuts, short or long, don’t go wrong.’ He took a lookupanddownthe Road.Noonewasinsight;andheled the way quickly down towards the wooded valley. His plan, asfar as they could understand itwithout know- ingthecountry,wastogotowards Archetatfirst,buttobear right and pass it on the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands to Weathertop Hill. In that way they would, if all went well, cut off a great loop of the Road, which further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater Marshes. But, of course, they would have to pass through the marshes themselves, and Strider’s description of them was not encouraging. However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. Indeed, if it had not been for the disturbing events of the
238 the fellowship of the ring nightbefore,theywouldhaveenjoyedthispartofthejourney better than any up to that time. The sun was shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and full of colour, and seemed peaceful and wholesome. Strider guided them confidently among the many crossing paths, although left to themselves they would soon have been at a loss.Hewastakingawanderingcoursewithmanyturnsand doublings, to put off any pursuit. ‘Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,’ he said; ‘though I don’t think he will follow us him- self.Heknowsthelandroundherewellenough,butheknows he is not a match for me in a wood. It is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I don’t suppose they are far away. If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.’ Whetherbecauseof Strider’sskillorforsomeotherreason, theysawnosignandheardnosoundofanyotherlivingthing allthatday:neithertwo-footed,exceptbirds;norfour-footed, except one fox and a few squirrels. The next day they began to steer a steady course eastwards; and still all was quiet and peaceful.Onthethirddayoutfrom Breetheycameoutofthe Chetwood.Thelandhadbeenfallingsteadily,eversincethey turnedasidefromthe Road,andtheynowenteredawideflat expanseofcountry,muchmoredifficulttomanage.Theywere far beyond the borders of the Bree-land, out in the pathless wilderness,anddrawingneartothe Midgewater Marshes. The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there they came upon pools, and wide stretches of reedsandrushesfilledwiththewarblingoflittlehiddenbirds. Theyhadtopicktheirwaycarefullytokeepbothdry-footed and on their proper course. At first they made fair progress, but as they went on, their passage became slower and more dangerous. The marshes were bewildering and treacherous, and there was no permanent trail even for Rangers to find through their shifting quagmires. The flies began to torment them, and the air was full of clouds of tiny midges that crept up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair.
a knife in the dark 239 ‘I am being eaten alive!’ cried Pippin. ‘Midgewater! There are more midges than water!’ ‘What do they live on when they can’t get hobbit?’ asked Sam, scratching his neck. They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Their camping-place was damp, cold, and uncom- fortable; and the biting insects would not let them sleep. Therewerealsoabominablecreatureshauntingthereedsand tussocksthatfromthesoundofthemwereevilrelativesofthe cricket.Therewerethousandsofthem,andtheysqueakedall round, neek-breek, breek-neek, unceasingly all the night, until the hobbits were nearly frantic. The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost as comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them) had been left behind, the midges still pursued them. As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it flashed and faded many times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off. ‘What is the light?’ he said to Strider, who had risen, and was standing, gazing ahead into the night. ‘Idonotknow,’Strideranswered.‘Itistoodistanttomake out. It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.’ Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white flashes, and against them the tall dark figure of Strider, standing silent and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep. They had not gone far on the fifth day when they left the last straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behind them. The land before them began steadily to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could now see a line of hills. The highest of them was at the right of the line and a little separated from the others. It had a conical top, slightly flattened at the summit. ‘That is Weathertop,’ said Strider. ‘The Old Road, which
240 the fellowship of the ring wehaveleftfarawayonourright,runstothesouthofitand passes not far from its foot. We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight towards it. I suppose we had better do so.’ ‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo. ‘I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. It is close to the Road.’ ‘But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there?’ ‘Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he may not pass through Bree, and so he may not know what we are doing. And anyway, unless by luck we arrive almost together,weshallmissoneanother;itwillnotbesafeforhim or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find us in the wilderness, they are likelyto make for Weathertop them- selves. It commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there are many birds and beasts in this country that could see us, as we stand here, from that hill-top. Not all the birds are to be trusted, and there are other spies more evil than they are.’ The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up into the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them with bright unfriendly eyes. ‘You do makemefeeluncomfortableandlonesome,Strider!’hesaid. ‘What do you advise us to do?’ asked Frodo. ‘I think,’ answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure,‘Ithinkthebestthingistogoasstraighteastwardfrom here as we can, to make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.’ All that day they plodded along, until the cold and early eveningcamedown.Thelandbecamedrierandmorebarren; but mists and vapours lay behind them on the marshes. A fewmelancholybirdswerepipingandwailing,untiltheround redsunsankslowlyintothewesternshadows;thenanempty silence fell. The hobbits thought of the soft light of sunset glancingthroughthecheerfulwindowsof Bag Endfaraway.
a knife in the dark 241 At the day’s end they came to a stream that wandered down from the hills to lose itself in the stagnant marshland, andtheywentupalongitsbankswhilethelightlasted.Itwas already night when at last they halted and made their camp under some stunted alder-trees by the shores of the stream. Aheadthereloomednowagainsttheduskyskythebleakand treeless backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider,itseemed,didnotsleepatall.Themoonwaswaxing, andintheearlynight-hours acoldgreylightlayontheland. Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There was a frost in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The hobbitsfeltrefreshed,asiftheyhadhadanightofunbroken sleep. Already they were getting used to much walking on short commons – shorter at any rate than what in the Shire theywouldhavethoughtbarelyenoughtokeepthemontheir legs.Pippindeclaredthat Frodowaslookingtwicethehobbit that he had been. ‘Very odd,’ said Frodo, tightening his belt, ‘considering that there is actually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinningprocesswillnotgoonindefinitely,or Ishallbecome a wraith.’ ‘Do not speak of such things!’ said Strider quickly, and with surprising earnestness. The hills drew nearer. They made an undulating ridge, often rising almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or passes leading into the eastern land beyond. Along the crest of the ridge the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and dikes,andinthecleftstherestillstoodtheruinsofoldworks of stone. By night they had reached the feet of the westward slopes, and there they camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, and they were six days out from Bree. Inthemorningtheyfound,forthefirsttimesincetheyhad left the Chetwood, a track plain to see. They turned right and followed it southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line thatseemedchosensoastokeepasmuchhiddenaspossible
242 the fellowship of the ring from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of the flats to the west. It dived into dells, and hugged steep banks; and where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there were lines of large boulders and hewn stones that screened the travellers almost like a hedge. ‘I wonder who made this path, and what for,’ said Merry, as they walked along one of these avenues, where the stones wereunusuallylargeandcloselyset.‘Iamnotsurethat Ilike it: it has a – well, rather a barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?’ ‘No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,’ answered Strider. ‘The Men of the West did not live here; though in their latter days they defended the hills for a while against the evil that came out of Angmar. This path was made to serve the forts along the walls. But long before, in the first days of the North Kingdom, they built a great watch-tower on Weathertop, Amon Suˆl they called it. Itwasburnedandbroken,andnothingremainsofitnowbut atumbledring,likearoughcrownontheoldhill’shead.Yet once it was tall and fair. It is told that Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in the days of the Last Alliance.’ Thehobbitsgazedat Strider.Itseemedthathewaslearned in old lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. ‘Who was Gil-galad?’ asked Merry; but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low voice murmured: Gil-galad was an Elven-king. Of him the harpers sadly sing: the last whose realm was fair and free between the Mountains and the Sea. His sword was long, his lance was keen, his shining helm afar was seen; the countless stars of heaven’s field were mirrored in his silver shield.
a knife in the dark 243 But long ago he rode away, and where he dwelleth none can say; for into darkness fell his star in Mordor where the shadows are. Theothersturnedinamazement,forthevoicewas Sam’s. ‘Don’t stop!’ said Merry. ‘That’sall Iknow,’stammered Sam,blushing.‘Ilearnedit from Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing how I was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my letters. He was mighty book-learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote poetry. He wrote what I have just said.’ ‘He did not make it up,’ said Strider. ‘It is part of the lay that is called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have translated it. I never knew that.’ ‘There was a lot more,’ said Sam, ‘all about Mordor. I didn’t learn that part, it gave me the shivers. I never thought I should be going that way myself!’ ‘Going to Mordor!’ cried Pippin. ‘I hope it won’t come to that!’ ‘Do not speak that name so loudly!’ said Strider. It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of the path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light of the October sun, a grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward slope of the hill. They decided to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad. Concealment was no longer possible, and they could only hopethatnoenemyorspywasobservingthem.Nothingwas tobeseenmovingonthehill.If Gandalfwasanywhereabout, there was no sign of him. Onthewesternflankof Weathertoptheyfoundasheltered hollow, at the bottom of which there was a bowl-shaped dell with grassy sides. There they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs and luggage. The other three went on. Afterhalfanhour’sploddingclimb Striderreachedthecrown
244 the fellowship of the ring of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last slope had been steep and rocky. On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancientstone-work,nowcrumblingorcoveredwithage-long grass. But in the centre a cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as if with fire. About them the turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill- top; but there was no sign of any living thing. Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all roundbelowthemawideprospect,forthemostpartoflands empty and featureless, except for patches of woodland away to the south, beyond which they caught here and there the glint of distant water. Beneath them on this southern side thereranlikearibbonthe Old Road,comingoutofthe West and winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east. Nothing was moving on it. Following its line eastward with their eyes they saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; behind them stood tallershapesofgrey,andbehindthoseagainwerehighwhite peaks glimmering among the clouds. ‘Well, here we are!’ said Merry. ‘And very cheerless and uninvitingitlooks!Thereisnowaterandnoshelter.Andno sign of Gandalf. But I don’t blame him for not waiting – if he ever came here.’ ‘Iwonder,’said Strider,lookingroundthoughtfully.‘Even if he was a day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrivedherefirst.Hecanrideveryswiftlywhenneedpresses.’ Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone on the top of the cairn; it was flatter than the others, and whiter, as if it hadescapedthefire.Hepickeditupandexaminedit,turning it in his fingers. ‘This has been handled recently,’ he said. ‘What do you think of these marks?’ On the flat under-side Frodo saw some scratches: . ‘There seems to be a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,’ he said. ‘The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin
a knife in the dark 245 branches,’ said Strider. ‘It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean something quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use runes, and they come here sometimes.’ ‘What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?’ asked Merry. ‘I should say,’ answered Strider, ‘that they stood for G3, and were a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that isthree days ago now.It would alsoshow that he wasin a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he had no time or did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is so, we must be wary.’ ‘Iwishwecouldfeelsurethathemadethemarks,whatever they may mean,’ said Frodo. ‘It would be a great comfort to know that he was on the way, in front of us or behind us.’ ‘Perhaps,’ said Strider. ‘For myself, I believe that he was here, and was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell. He is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselves and make our own way to Rivendell, as best we can.’ ‘Howfaris Rivendell?’asked Merry,gazingroundwearily. The world looked wild and wide from Weathertop. ‘Idon’t knowif the Roadhas everbeenmeasured inmiles beyond the Forsaken Inn, a day’s journey east of Bree,’ answered Strider. ‘Some say it is so far, and some say other- wise. It is a strange road, and folk are glad to reach their journey’s end, whether the time is long or short. But I know howlongitwouldtakemeonmyownfeet,withfairweather and no ill fortune: twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses the Loudwater that runs outof Rivendell.Wehaveatleastafortnight’sjourneybefore us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.’ ‘A fortnight!’ said Frodo. ‘A lot may happen in that time.’ ‘It may,’ said Strider.
246 the fellowship of the ring Theystoodforawhilesilentonthehill-top,nearitssouth- ward edge. In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully realizedhishomelessnessanddanger.Hewishedbitterlythat his fortune had left him in the quiet and beloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful Road, leading back westward – to hishome.Suddenlyhewasawarethattwoblackspeckswere moving slowly along it, going westward; and looking again he saw that three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched Strider’s arm. ‘Look,’ he said, pointing downwards. At once Strider flung himself on the ground behind the ruined circle, pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside. ‘What is it?’ he whispered. ‘I do not know, but I fear the worst,’ answered Strider. Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and peered through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer bright, for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now overtaken the sun, as it began to go down. They could all see the black specks, butneither Frodonor Merrycouldmakeouttheirshapesfor certain; yet something told them that there, far below, were Black Riders assembling on the Road beyond the foot of the hill. ‘Yes,’said Strider,whosekeenersightlefthiminnodoubt. ‘The enemy is here!’ Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the hill to find their companions. Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small dell and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring of clear water in the hillside, and near it footprints not more than a day or two old. In the dell itself they found recent traces of a fire, and other signs of a hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell nearesttothehill.Behindthem Samcameuponasmallstore of firewood neatly stacked.
a knife in the dark 247 ‘I wonder if old Gandalfhas been here,’ he said to Pippin. ‘Whoever it was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.’ Striderwasgreatlyinterestedinthesediscoveries.‘Iwish I had waited and explored the ground down here myself,’ he said, hurrying off to the spring to examine the footprints. ‘It is just as I feared,’ he said, when he came back. ‘Sam and Pippinhavetrampledthesoftground,andthemarksare spoilt or confused. Rangers have been here lately. It is they wholeftthefirewoodbehind.Buttherearealsoseveralnewer tracks that were not made by Rangers. At least one set was made, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot now be certain, but I think there were many booted feet.’ He paused and stood in anxious thought. Eachofthehobbitssawinhismindavisionofthecloaked andbooted Riders.Ifthehorsemenhadalreadyfoundthedell, the sooner Strider led them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow with great dislike, now that he had heard newsoftheirenemiesonthe Road,onlyafewmilesaway. ‘Hadn’t we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?’ he asked impatiently. ‘It is getting late, and I don’t like this hole: it makes my heart sink somehow.’ ‘Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,’ answered Strider, looking up and considering the time and the weather. ‘Well, Sam,’ he said at last, ‘I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere better that we could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight for themoment,andifwemovedweshouldbemuchmorelikely tobe seenbyspies.All wecoulddowould betogo rightout of our way back north on this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is here. The Road is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to take cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.’ ‘Can the Riders see?’ asked Merry. ‘I mean, they seem usually to have used their noses rather than their eyes,
248 the fellowship of the ring smelling for us, if smelling is the right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.’ ‘Iwastoocarelessonthehill-top,’answered Strider.‘Iwas very anxious to find some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see, and the Riders can use men and othercreaturesasspies,aswefoundat Bree.Theythemselves do not see the world of light as we do, but our shapes cast shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun destroys; and in the dark they perceive many signs and forms that are hidden from us: then they are most to be feared. And at all timestheysmellthebloodoflivingthings,desiringandhating it. Senses, too, there are other than sight or smell. We can feel their presence – it troubled our hearts, as soon as we came here, and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,’he added,and hisvoice sankto awhisper, ‘the Ring draws them.’ ‘Istherenoescapethen?’said Frodo,lookingroundwildly. ‘If I move I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!’ Striderlaidhishandonhisshoulder.‘Thereisstillhope,’he said.‘Youarenotalone.Letustakethiswoodthatissetready forthefireasasign.Thereislittleshelterordefencehere,but fireshallserveforboth.Sauroncanputfiretohiseviluses,as hecanallthings,butthese Ridersdonotloveit,andfearthose whowieldit.Fireisourfriendinthewilderness.’ ‘Maybe,’muttered Sam.‘Itisalsoasgoodawayofsaying ‘‘here we are’’ as I can think of, bar shouting.’ Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell they lit a fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of evening began to fall, and it grew cold. They were suddenly aware ofgreathunger,fortheyhadnoteatenanythingsincebreak- fast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper. The lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly places deserted by all the races of the world.
a knife in the dark 249 Rangers passed at times beyond the hills, but they were few anddidnotstay.Otherwandererswererare,andofevilsort: trolls might stray down at times out of the northern valleys of the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road would travellers befound,mostoftendwarves,hurryingalongonbusinessof their own, and with no help and few words to spare for strangers. ‘Idon’tseehowourfoodcanbemadetolast,’said Frodo. ‘We have been careful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no feast; but we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks still to go, and perhaps more.’ ‘There is food in the wild,’ said Strider; ‘berry, root, and herb;and Ihavesomeskillasahunteratneed.Youneednot be afraid of starving before winter comes. But gathering and catchingfoodislongandwearywork,andweneedhaste.So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables of Elrond’s house!’ Thecoldincreasedasdarknesscameon.Peeringoutfrom the edge of the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now vanishing quickly into shadow. The sky above had clearedagainandwasslowlyfilledwithtwinklingstars.Frodo andhiscompanionshuddledroundthefire,wrappedinevery garmentandblankettheypossessed;but Striderwascontent withasinglecloak,andsatalittleapart,drawingthoughtfully at his pipe. As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out brightly he began to tell them tales to keep their minds from fear. He knew many histories and legends of long ago, of Elves and Men and the good and evil deeds of the Elder Days. They wondered how old he was, and where he had learned all this lore. ‘Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he paused at the end of a story of the Elf-kingdoms. ‘Do you know any more of that old lay that you spoke of?’ ‘I do indeed,’ answered Strider. ‘So also does Frodo, for it concernsusclosely.’Merryand Pippinlookedat Frodo,who was staring into the fire.
250 the fellowship of the ring ‘Iknowonlythelittlethat Gandalfhastoldme,’said Frodo slowly. ‘Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land of——’ ‘No!’ said Strider interrupting, ‘I do not think that tale should be told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through to the house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.’ ‘Thentellussomeothertaleoftheolddays,’begged Sam; ‘a tale about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear more about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.’ ‘I will tell you the tale of Tinu´viel,’ said Strider, ‘in brief – for it is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now, except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a fair tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may lift up your hearts.’ He wassilentforsometime,andthenhebegannottospeakbut to chant softly: The leaves were long, the grass was green, The hemlock-umbels tall and fair, And in the glade a light was seen Of stars in shadow shimmering. Tinu´viel was dancing there To music of a pipe unseen, And light of stars was in her hair, And in her raiment glimmering. There Beren came from mountains cold, And lost he wandered under leaves, And where the Elven-river rolled He walked alone and sorrowing. He peered between the hemlock-leaves And saw in wonder flowers of gold Upon her mantle and her sleeves, And her hair like shadow following.
a knife in the dark 251 Enchantment healed his weary feet That over hills were doomed to roam; And forth he hastened, strong and fleet, And grasped at moonbeams glistening. Through woven woods in Elvenhome She lightly fled on dancing feet, And left him lonely still to roam In the silent forest listening. He heard there oft the flying sound Of feet as light as linden-leaves, Or music welling underground, In hidden hollows quavering. Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves, And one by one with sighing sound Whispering fell the beechen leaves In the wintry woodland wavering. He sought her ever, wandering far Where leaves of years were thickly strewn, By light of moon and ray of star In frosty heavens shivering. Her mantle glinted in the moon, As on a hill-top high and far She danced, and at her feet was strewn A mist of silver quivering. When winter passed, she came again, And her song released the sudden spring, Like rising lark, and falling rain, And melting water bubbling. He saw the elven-flowers spring About her feet, and healed again He longed by her to dance and sing Upon the grass untroubling.
252 the fellowship of the ring Again she fled, but swift he came. Tinu´viel! Tinu´viel! He called her by her Elvish name; And there she halted listening. One moment stood she, and a spell His voice laid on her: Beren came, And doom fell on Tinu´viel That in his arms lay glistening. As Beren looked into her eyes Within the shadows of her hair, The trembling starlight of the skies He saw there mirrored shimmering. Tinu´viel the elven-fair, Immortal maiden elven-wise, About him cast her shadowy hair And arms like silver glimmering. Long was the way that fate them bore, O’er stony mountains cold and grey, Through halls of iron and darkling door, And woods of nightshade morrowless. The Sundering Seas between them lay, And yet at last they met once more, And long ago they passed away In the forest singing sorrowless. Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. ‘That is a song,’ he said, ‘in the mode that is called ann-thennath among the Elves, but is hard to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tells of the meetingof Berensonof Barahirand Lu´thien Tinu´viel.Beren wasamortalman,but Lu´thienwasthedaughterof Thingol, a King of Elves upon Middle-earth when the world was young; and she was the fairest maiden that has ever been among all the children of this world. As the stars above the mists of the Northern lands was her loveliness, and in her
a knife in the dark 253 face was a shining light. In those days the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was but a servant, dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West coming back to Middle-earth made war upon him to regain the Silmarils which he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the Enemy was victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping through great peril came over the Mountainsof Terrorintothehidden Kingdomof Thingolin theforestof Neldoreth.Therehebeheld Lu´thiensingingand dancinginagladebesidetheenchantedriver Esgalduin;and he named her Tinu´viel, that is Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and they were parted long. Tinu´viel rescued Beren from the dungeons of Sauron,andtogethertheypassedthroughgreatdangers,and cast down even the Great Enemy from his throne, and took from his iron crown one of the three Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the bride-price of Lu´thien to Thingol her father. Yet at the last Beren was slain by the Wolf that came from the gates of Angband, and he died in the arms of Tinu´viel.Butshechosemortality,andtodiefromtheworld, so that she might follow him; and it is sung that they met againbeyondthe Sundering Seas,andafterabrieftimewalk- ingaliveoncemoreinthegreenwoods,togethertheypassed, long ago, beyond the confines of this world. So it is that Lu´thien Tinu´viel alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left the world, and they have lost her whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of old descended among Men. There live still those of whom Lu´thien was the foremother, and it is said that her line shall never fail. Elrond of Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren and Lu´thienwasborn Dior Thingol’sheir;andofhim Elwing the Whitewhom Ea¨rendilwedded,hethatsailedhisshipout of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril upon his brow. And of Ea¨rendil came the Kings of Nu´menor, that is Westernesse.’ As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes
254 the fellowship of the ring shone, and his voice was rich and deep. Above him was a black starry sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over the crown of Weathertop behind him. The waxing moon was climbing slowly above the hill that overshadowed them, and the stars above the hill-top faded. The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. ‘Look!’ said Merry. ‘The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.’ The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on thetopofthehillsomethingsmallanddarkagainsttheglim- mer of the moonrise. It was perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light. Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo and Pippin remained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill intently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping over his heart, now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer tothefire.Atthatmoment Samcamerunningbackfromthe edge of the dell. ‘Idon’tknowwhatitis,’hesaid,‘but Isuddenlyfeltafraid. Idurstn’tgooutsidethisdellforanymoney;Ifeltthatsome- thing was creeping up the slope.’ ‘Did you see anything?’ asked Frodo, springing to his feet. ‘No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn’t stop to look.’ ‘I saw something,’ said Merry; ‘or I thought I did – away westwards where the moonlight was falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be moving this way.’ ‘Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!’ cried Strider. ‘Get some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!’ For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with their backs turned to the wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or movement in the night. Frodo stirred, feeling that he must break the silence: he longed to shout out aloud. ‘Hush!’whispered Strider.‘What’sthat?’gasped Pippinat the same moment.
a knife in the dark 255 Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, they felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or more than one. They strained their eyes, and the shadows seemedtogrow.Soontherecouldbenodoubt:threeorfour tall black figures were standing there on the slope, looking down on them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes in the deep shade behind them. Frodo thought that he heard a faint hiss as of venomous breath and felt a thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly advanced. Terrorovercame Pippinand Merry,andtheythrewthem- selves flaton theground. Sam shrankto Frodo’sside. Frodo washardlylessterrifiedthanhiscompanions;hewasquaking as if he was bitter cold, but his terror was swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. He did not forget the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf; but something seemed to be compelling him to disregard all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger. He could not speak. He felt Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great trouble, but he could not turntowardshim.Heshuthiseyesandstruggledforawhile; butresistancebecameunbearable,andatlastheslowlydrew out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand. Immediately, though everything else remained as before, dim and dark, the shapes became terribly clear. He was able to see beneath their black wrappings. There were five tall figures: two standing on the lip of the dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned keen and merciless eyes; under theirmantleswerelonggreyrobes;upontheirgreyhairswere helms of silver; in their haggard hands were swords of steel. Their eyes fell on him and pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he drew his own sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand. Twoofthefigureshalted.Thethirdwastallerthantheothers:
256 the fellowship of the ring hishairwaslongandgleamingandonhishelmwasacrown. In one hand he held a long sword, and in the other a knife; both the knife and the hand that held it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo. At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and he heard himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!Atthesametimehestruckatthefeetofhisenemy. Ashrillcryrangoutinthenight;andhefeltapainlikeadart of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Strider leaping out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last effort Frodo, dropping his sword, slipped the Ring from his finger and closed his right hand tight upon it.
Chapter 12 FLIGHT TO THE FORD When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately. He was lying by the fire, which was now piled highandburningbrightly.Histhreecompanionswerebend- ing over him. ‘What has happened? Where is the pale king?’ he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to answer for a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he gatheredfrom Samthattheyhadseennothingbutthevague shadowy shapes coming towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the grass with his sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up andlayhimnearthefire,andthenhedisappeared.Thatwas now a good while ago. Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of the shadows. They started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down swiftly at his side. ‘Iamnota Black Rider,Sam,’hesaidgently,‘norinleague with them. I have been trying to discover something of their movements; but I have found nothing. I cannot think why theyhavegoneanddonotattackagain.Butthereisnofeeling of their presence anywhere at hand.’ When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of
258 the fellowship of the ring concern, and shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with it. ‘Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!’ he said. Then he got up and walked away, and called Sam to him. ‘I think I understandthingsbetternow,’hesaidinalowvoice.‘There seem only to have been five of the enemy. Why they were not all here, I don’t know; but I don’t think they expected to be resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not far, I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape. They are only waiting, because they think that their purposeisalmostaccomplished,andthatthe Ringcannotfly much further. I fear, Sam, that they believe your master has a deadly wound that will subdue him to their will. We shall see!’ Sam choked with tears. ‘Don’t despair!’ said Strider. ‘You musttrustmenow.Your Frodoismadeofsternerstuffthan Ihadguessed,though Gandalfhintedthatitmightproveso. Heisnotslain,and Ithinkhewillresisttheevilpowerofthe wound longer than his enemies expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am away!’ He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness. Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and a deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side. His friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound. The night passed slowly and wearily.Dawnwasgrowinginthesky,andthedellwasfilling with grey light, when Strider at last returned. ‘Look!’ he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a blackcloakthathadlaintherehiddenbythedarkness.Afoot above the lower hem there was a slash. ‘This was the stroke of Frodo’s sword,’ he said. ‘The only hurt that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish that piercethatdreadful King.Moredeadlytohimwasthename of Elbereth.’ ‘And more deadly to Frodo was this!’ He stooped again
flight to the ford 259 and lifted up a long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw that near the end its edge was notched and the point was broken off. But even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leavingonlythehiltin Strider’shand.‘Alas!’hecried.‘Itwas this accursed knife that gave the wound. Few now have the skillinhealingtomatchsuchevilweapons.But Iwilldowhat I can.’ Hesatdownontheground,andtakingthedagger-hiltlaid it on his knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it aside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words the others could not catch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out the long leaves of a plant. ‘These leaves,’ he said, ‘I have walked far to find; for this plant does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets away south of the Road I found it in the dark by the scent of itsleaves.’ Hecrushed aleaf inhis fingers,and it gaveout a sweet and pungent fragrance. ‘It is fortunate that I could find it, for it is a healing plant that the Men of the West broughtto Middle-earth.Athelastheynamedit,anditgrows now sparsely and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old; and it is not known in the North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It has great virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.’ He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo’s shoulder. The fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their minds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some power over the wound, for Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in his side; but the life did not return to his arm, and he could not raise or use his hand. He bitterly regretted his foolishness, and reproached himself for weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he would remain maimed for life, and how they
260 the fellowship of the ring would now manage to continue their journey. He felt too weak to stand. The others were discussing this very question. They quickly decided to leave Weathertop as soon as possible. ‘I think now,’ said Strider, ‘that the enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, then he must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. In any case we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night, and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.’ As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried foodandpacked.Itwasimpossiblefor Frodotowalk,sothey divided the greater part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo on the pony. In the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed fat- ter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its newmasters,especiallyfor Sam. Bill Ferny’streatmentmust have been very hard for the journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life. Theystartedoffinasoutherlydirection.Thiswouldmean crossing the Road, but it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm, especially at night, while fire would be some protection for them all. It was also his plan to shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: east beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards. They made their way slowly and cautiously round the south-western slopes of the hill, and came in a little while to the edge of the Road. There was no sign of the Riders. But even as they were hurrying across they heard far away two cries: a cold voice calling and a cold voice answering. Trem- blingtheysprangforward,andmadeforthethicketsthatlay ahead.Thelandbeforethemslopedawaysouthwards,butit waswildandpathless;bushesandstuntedtreesgrewindense patches with wide barren spaces in between. The grass was
flight to the ford 261 scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the thickets were faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey was slow and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudged along.Frodo’sheartwasgrievedashewatchedthemwalking beside him with their heads down, and their backs bowed under their burdens. Even Strider seemed tired and heavy- hearted. Before the first day’s march was over Frodo’s pain began togrowagain,buthedidnotspeakofitforalongtime.Four days passed, without the ground or the scene changing much,exceptthatbehindthem Weathertopslowlysank,and beforethemthedistantmountainsloomedalittlenearer.Yet since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked their flight or followed them. They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch in pairs by night, expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the grey night, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled moon; but they saw nothing, and heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once did they feel the sense of present evil thathadassailedthembeforetheattackinthedell.Itseemed too much to hope that the Riders had already lost their trail again. Perhaps they were waiting to make some ambush in a narrow place? At theend ofthe fifth daythe groundbegan once moreto riseslowlyoutofthewideshallowvalleyintowhichtheyhad descended. Strider now turned their course again north- eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle of wooded hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round the feet of the hills; and to their right a grey river gleamed pale in the thin sunshine. In the distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley half-veiled in mist. ‘Iamafraidwemustgobacktothe Roadhereforawhile,’ said Strider. ‘We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elvescall Mitheithel.Itflowsdownoutofthe Ettenmoors, the troll-fells north of Rivendell, and joins the Loudwater
262 the fellowship of the ring away in the South. Some call it the Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the Sea. There is no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last Bridge on which the Road crosses.’ ‘What is that other river we can see far away there?’ asked Merry. ‘That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,’ answered Strider. ‘The Road runs along the edge of the hills for many milesfromthe Bridgetothe Fordof Bruinen.But Ihavenot yet thought how we shall cross that water. One river at a time! Weshall befortunate indeed ifwe donot find the Last Bridge held against us.’ Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the borders of the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but theyfoundnosignofanytravellersorriders.Hereunderthe shadow of the hills there had been some rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see. They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope. They dreaded to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider made them take cover in a thicket at the side of the Road, while he went forward to explore. Before long he came hurrying back. ‘I can see no sign of the enemy,’ he said, ‘and I wonder very much what that means. But I have found something very strange.’ Heheldouthishand,andshowedasinglepale-greenjewel. ‘I found it in the mud in the middle of the Bridge,’ he said. ‘It is a beryl, an elf-stone. Whether it was set there, or let fall by chance, I cannot say; but it brings hope to me. I will take it as a sign that we may pass the Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep to the Road, without some clearer token.’ * * *
flight to the ford 263 At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in safety, hearing no sound but the water swirling against its three great arches. A mile further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the steep lands on theleftofthe Road.Here Striderturnedaside,andsoonthey were lost in a sombre country of dark trees winding among the feet of sullen hills. The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and theperilous Roadbehindthem;butthisnewcountryseemed threatening and unfriendly. As they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here and there upon heights and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone, and the ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo, who was not walking, had time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo’s account of his journey and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near the Trolls’ wood where his first serious adventure had happened. Frodo guessed that they were now in the same region, and wondered if by chance they would pass near the spot. ‘Who lives in this land?’ he asked. ‘And who built these towers? Is this troll-country?’ ‘No!’said Strider.‘Trollsdonotbuild.Noonelivesinthis land. Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became an evil people, as legends tell, for they fell under the shadow of Angmar. But all were destroyed in the war that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But that is now so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on the land.’ ‘Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty and forgetful?’ asked Peregrin. ‘The birds and beasts do not tell tales of that sort.’ ‘The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,’ said Strider; ‘and many more things than I can tell are remem- bered in Rivendell.’ ‘Have you often been to Rivendell?’ said Frodo. ‘I have,’ said Strider. ‘I dwelt there once, and still I return
264 the fellowship of the ring when I may. There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the fair house of Elrond.’ The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to the River Bruinen, but both were now hidden from view. The travellers came into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark and silent. Trees with old and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes of pine-wood. The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for theyhadtopicktheirwaythroughapathlesscountry,encum- beredbyfallentreesandtumbledrocks.Aslongastheycould they avoided climbing for Frodo’s sake, and because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales. They had been two days in this country when the weather turnedwet.Thewindbegantoblowsteadilyoutofthe West and pour the water of the distant seas on the dark heads of the hills in fine drenching rain. By nightfall they were all soaked, and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get any fire to burn. The next day the hills rose still higher and steeperbeforethem,andtheywereforcedtoturnawaynorth- wards out of their course. Strider seemed to be getting anxi- ous: they were nearly ten days out from Weathertop, and their stock of provisions was beginning to run low. It went on raining. That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock-wall behindthem,inwhichtherewasashallowcave,amerescoop in the cliff. Frodo was restless. The cold and wet had made hiswoundmorepainfulthanever,andtheacheandsenseof deadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks of rock, water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling fall of a loosened stone. He felt that black shapes were advancingtosmotherhim;butwhenhesatuphesawnothing butthebackof Stridersittinghunchedup,smokinghispipe, and watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream, in which he walked on the grass in his garden in the
flight to the ford 265 Shire, but it seemed faint and dim, less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking over the hedge. In the morning he woke to find that the rain had stopped. The clouds were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale stripsofblueappearedbetweenthem.Thewindwasshifting again. They did not start early. Immediately after their cold and comfortless breakfast Strider went off alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he came back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie of the land. When he returned he was not reassuring. ‘We have come too farto thenorth,’ he said,‘and wemust find someway to turn back southwards again. If we keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north of Rivendell. That is troll-country, and little known to me. We could per- haps find our way through and come round to Rivendell fromthenorth;butitwouldtaketoolong,for Idonotknow the way, and our food would not last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.’ The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky ground. They found a passage between two hills that led theminto avalley runningsouth-east, thedirectionthat they wished to take; but towards the end of the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark edge against the sky was broken into many bare points like teeth of a blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it. They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before long Frodo was obliged to dismount and strugglealongonfoot.Evensotheyoftendespairedofgetting their pony up, or indeed of finding a path for themselves, burdened as they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They hadclimbedontoanarrowsaddlebetweentwohigherpoints, and the land fell steeply away again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the ground
266 the fellowship of the ring shivering.Hisleftarmwaslifeless,andhissideandshoulder felt as if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks about him seemed shadowy and dim. ‘We cannot go any further,’ said Merry to Strider. ‘I am afraid this has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him in Rivendell, if we ever get there?’ ‘We shall see,’ answered Strider. ‘There is nothing more that I can do in the wilderness; and it is chiefly because of his wound that I am so anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.’ ‘What is the matter with my master?’ asked Sam in a low voice, looking appealingly at Strider. ‘His wound was small, anditisalreadyclosed.There’snothingtobeseenbutacold white mark on his shoulder.’ ‘Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,’ said Strider, ‘and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive out. But do not give up hope, Sam!’ Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small fire down under the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as if stone had once been quarried there. They sat huddled together. The wind blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark wings were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that sought him in all the hollows of the hills. The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, andthelightpaleandclearinarain-washedsky.Theirhearts were encouraged, but they longed for the sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, Strider took Merry with him and went to survey the country from the height to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining brightlywhenhereturnedwithmorecomfortingnews.They were now going more or less in the right direction. If they
flight to the ford 267 went on, down the further side of the ridge, they would have the Mountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider had caught a glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from view, the Road to the Ford was not far from the River and lay on the side nearest to them. ‘We must make for the Road again,’ he said. ‘We cannot hopetofindapaththroughthesehills.Whateverdangermay beset it, the Road is our only way to the Ford.’ Assoonastheyhadeatentheysetoutagain.Theyclimbed slowly down the southern side of the ridge; but the way was much easier than they had expected, for the slope was far less steep on this side, and before long Frodo was able to ride again. Bill Ferny’s poor old pony was developing an unexpected talent for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many jolts as possible. The spirits of the party rose again. Even Frodo felt better in the morning light, but every now and again a mist seemed to obscure his sight, and he passed his hands over his eyes. Pippinwasalittleaheadoftheothers.Suddenlyheturned round and called to them. ‘There is a path here!’ he cried. When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake: there were clearly the beginnings of a path, that climbed with many windings out of the woods below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In places it was now faint and overgrown, or choked with fallen stones and trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used. It was a path madebystrongarmsandheavyfeet.Hereandthereoldtrees had been cut or broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way. Theyfollowedthetrackforsomewhile,foritofferedmuch the easiest way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came into the dark woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming out of a beltoffir-treesitransteeplydownaslope,andturnedsharply to the left round the corner of a rocky shoulder of the hill.
268 the fellowship of the ring When they came to the corner they looked round and saw thatthe pathran onovera levelstripunder theface ofalow cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge. Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or rock-chamber behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam, and Merry pushing with all their strength managed to open the door a little wider, and then Strider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on the floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen near the entrance except some great empty jars and broken pots. ‘Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!’ said Pippin. ‘Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we knowwhomadethepath–andwehadbettergetoffitquick.’ ‘There is no need, I think,’ said Strider, coming out. ‘It is certainlyatroll-hole,butitseemstohavebeenlongforsaken. Idon’tthinkweneedbeafraid.Butletusgoondownwarily, and we shall see.’ The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right again across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking to show Strider that he was stillafraid,wentonaheadwith Merry.Samand Stridercame behind, one on each side of Frodo’s pony, for the path was now broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone very far before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both looked terrified. ‘There are trolls!’ Pippin panted. ‘Down in a clearing in thewoodsnotfarbelow. Wegotasightofthemthroughthe tree-trunks. They are very large!’ ‘We will come and look at them,’ said Strider, picking up a stick. Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared. The sun was now high, and it shone down through the half-stripped branches of the trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of light. They halted suddenly on the edge, and peered through the tree-trunks, holding their breath.
flight to the ford 269 There stood the trolls: three large trolls. One was stooping, and the other two stood staring at him. Striderwalkedforwardunconcernedly.‘Getup,oldstone!’ he said, and broke his stick upon the stooping troll. Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the hobbits, and then even Frodo laughed. ‘Well!’ he said. ‘We are forgetting our family history! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf, quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.’ ‘I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!’ said Pippin. He knew the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact he had never more than half believed it. Even now he looked at the stone trolls with sus- picion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them to life again. ‘You are forgetting not only your family history, but all youeverknewabouttrolls,’said Strider.‘Itisbroaddaylight with a bright sun, and yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale of live trolls waiting for us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an old bird’s nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament for a live troll!’ They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the re- minder of Bilbo’s first successful adventure was heartening. Thesun,too,waswarmandcomforting,andthemistbefore his eyes seemed to be lifting a little. They rested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right under the shadow of the trolls’ large legs. ‘Won’t somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high?’ said Merry, when they had finished. ‘We haven’t had a song or a tale for days.’ ‘Not since Weathertop,’ said Frodo. The others looked at him. ‘Don’t worry about me!’ he added. ‘I feel much better, but I don’t think I could sing. Perhaps Sam could dig some- thing out of his memory.’ ‘Comeon,Sam!’said Merry.‘There’smorestoredinyour head than you let on about.’
270 the fellowship of the ring ‘I don’t know about that,’ said Sam. ‘But how would this suit?Itain’twhat Icallproperpoetry,ifyouunderstandme: just a bit of nonsense. But these old images here brought it to my mind.’ Standing up, with his hands behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune. Troll sat alone on his seat of stone, And munched and mumbled a bare old bone; For many a year he had gnawed it near, For meat was hard to come by. Done by! Gum by! In a cave in the hills he dwelt alone, And meat was hard to come by. Up came Tom with his big boots on. Said he to Troll: ‘Pray, what is yon? For it looks like the shin o’ my nuncle Tim, As should be a-lyin’ in graveyard. Caveyard! Paveyard! This many a year has Tim been gone, And I thought he were lyin’ in graveyard.’ ‘My lad,’ said Troll, ‘this bone I stole. But what be bones that lie in a hole? Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o’ lead, Afore I found his shinbone. Tinbone! Thinbone! He can spare a share for a poor old troll, For he don’t need his shinbone.’ Said Tom: ‘I don’t see why the likes o’ thee Without axin’ leave should go makin’ free With the shank or the shin o’ my father’s kin; So hand the old bone over! Rover! Trover! Though dead he be, it belongs to he; So hand the old bone over!’
flight to the ford 271 ‘For a couple o’ pins,’ says Troll, and grins, ‘I’ll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins. A bit o’ fresh meat will go down sweet! I’ll try my teeth on thee now. Hee now! See now! I’m tired o’ gnawing old bones and skins; I’ve a mind to dine on thee now.’ But just as he thought his dinner was caught, He found his hands had hold of naught. Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind And gave him the boot to larn him. Warn him! Darn him! A bump o’ the boot on the seat, Tom thought, Would be the way to larn him. But harder than stone is the flesh and bone Of a troll that sits in the hills alone. As well set your boot to the mountain’s root, For the seat of a troll don’t feel it. Peel it! Heal it! Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan, And he knew his toes could feel it. Tom’s leg is game, since home he came, And his bootless foot is lasting lame; But Troll don’t care, and he’s still there With the bone he boned from its owner. Doner! Boner! Troll’s old seat is still the same, And the bone he boned from its owner! ‘Well, that’s a warning to us all!’ laughed Merry. ‘It is as well you used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!’ ‘Where did you come by that, Sam?’ asked Pippin. ‘I’ve never heard those words before.’ Sam muttered something inaudible. ‘It’s out of his own
272 the fellowship of the ring head, of course,’ said Frodo. ‘I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgeeonthisjourney.Firsthewasaconspirator,nowhe’s a jester. He’ll end up by becoming a wizard – or a warrior!’ ‘I hope not,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t want to be neither!’ Intheafternoontheywentondownthewoods.Theywere probably following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many years before. After a few miles they came out on the top of a high bank above the Road. At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and winding eastward among woods and heather- coveredslopestowardsthe Fordandthe Mountains.Notfar down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the grass. On it roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen dwarf-runes and secret marks. ‘There!’ said Merry. ‘That must be the stone that marked theplacewherethetrolls’goldwashidden.Howmuchisleft of Bilbo’s share, I wonder, Frodo?’ Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had broughthomenotreasuremoreperilous,norlesseasytopart with. ‘None at all,’ he said. ‘Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it came from robbers.’ The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early evening.Therewasnosignofanyothertravellerstobeseen. As there was now no other possible course for them to take, theyclimbeddownthebank,andturningleftwentoffasfast as theycould. Soon a shoulderof the hillscut off the lightof the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to meet them from the mountains ahead. They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, where they could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that brought sudden fear back into their hearts: the noiseofhoofsbehindthem.Theylookedback,buttheycould not see far because of the many windings and rollings of the Road.Asquicklyastheycouldtheyscrambledoffthebeaten
flight to the ford 273 way and up into the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came to a small patch of thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the bushes, they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failing light, some thirty feet below them. The sound of hoofs drew nearer.Theyweregoingfast,withalightclippety-clippety-clip. Thenfaintly,asifitwasblownawayfromthembythebreeze, theyseemedtocatchadimringing,asofsmallbellstinkling. ‘That does not sound like a Black Rider’s horse!’ said Frodo,listeningintently.Theotherhobbitsagreedhopefully that it did not, but they all remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of pursuit for so long that any sound from behindseemedominousandunfriendly.But Striderwasnow leaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his ear, and a look of joy on his face. Thelightfaded,andtheleavesonthebushesrustledsoftly. Clearer and nearer now the bells jingled, and clippety-clip came thequick trottingfeet. Suddenlyinto viewbelow came a white horse, gleaming in the shadows, running swiftly. In thedusk itsheadstall flickeredandflashed, asifit werestud- ded with gems like living stars. The rider’s cloak streamed behind him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in the wind of his speed. To Frodo it appearedthatawhitelightwasshiningthroughtheformand raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil. Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road,leapingwithacrythroughtheheather;butevenbefore hehadmovedorcalled,theriderhadreinedinhishorseand halted, looking up towards the thicket where they stood. When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him calling out: Ai na vedui Du´nadan! Mae govannen! His speech andclearringingvoice leftnodoubtintheirhearts: therider wasofthe Elven-folk.Noothersthatdweltinthewideworld had voices so fair to hear. But there seemed to be a note of hasteorfearinhiscall,andtheysawthathewasnowspeaking quickly and urgently to Strider. Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the
274 the fellowship of the ring bushes and hurried down to the Road. ‘This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of Elrond,’ said Strider. ‘Hail, and well met at last!’ said the Elf-lord to Frodo. ‘I was sent from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the road.’ ‘Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?’ cried Frodo joyfully. ‘No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,’ answered Glorfindel. ‘Elrond received news that troubled him. Some of my kindred, journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin,* learned that things were amiss, and sent messages as swiftly as they could. They said that the Nine were abroad, and that you were astray bearing a great burden without guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that can ride openly against the Nine;butsuchastherewere,Elrondsentoutnorth,west, and south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness. ‘It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge of Mitheithel, andleftatoken there,nighonseven daysago. Three of the servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, but they withdrew and I pursued them westward. I came also upontwoothers,buttheyturnedawaysouthward.Sincethen I have searched for your trail. Two days ago I found it, and followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the hills again. But come! There is no time forfurthernews.Sinceyouareherewemustrisktheperilof the Road and go. There are five behind us, and when they find your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like the wind. And they are not all. Where the other four may be, I donotknow.Ifearthatwemayfindthe Fordisalreadyheld against us.’ While Glorfindelwasspeakingtheshadesofeveningdeep- ened.Frodofeltagreatwearinesscomeoverhim.Eversince the sun began to sink the mist before his eyes had darkened, * The Brandywine River.
flight to the ford 275 and he felt that a shadow was coming between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam’s arm. ‘My master is sick and wounded,’ said Sam angrily. ‘He can’t go on riding after nightfall. He needs rest.’ Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and takinghimgentlyinhisarmshelookedinhisfacewithgrave anxiety. Briefly Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop, and of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he took it, but he looked intently at it. ‘There are evilthings written on this hilt,’ hesaid; ‘though maybe your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we reachthehouseof Elrond!Butbewary,andhandleitaslittle asyoumay!Alas!thewoundsofthisweaponarebeyondmy skill to heal. I will do what I can – but all the more do I urge you now to go on without rest.’ He searched the wound on Frodo’s shoulder with his fingers, and his face grew graver, as if what he learned dis- quieted him. But Frodo felt the chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down from his shoulder to his hand,andthepaingreweasier.Theduskofeveningseemed togrowlighterabout him,asifacloudhad beenwithdrawn. He saw his friends’ faces more clearly again, and a measure of new hope and strength returned. ‘You shall ride my horse,’ said Glorfindel. ‘I will shorten the stirrups up to the saddle-skirts, and you must sit as tight as you can. But you need not fear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I command him to bear. His pace is light and smooth;andifdangerpressestoonear,hewillbearyouaway with a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy cannot rival.’ ‘No, he will not!’ said Frodo. ‘I shall not ride him, if I am to be carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind in danger.’ Glorfindel smiled. ‘I doubt very much,’ he said, ‘if your
276 the fellowship of the ring friends would be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would follow you and leave us in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that brings us all in peril.’ To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel’swhitehorse.Theponywasladeninstead with a great part of the others’ burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and for a time made good speed; but the hobbitsbegantofindithardtokeepupwiththeswifttireless feet of the Elf. On he led them, into the mouth of darkness, andstillonunderthedeepcloudednight.Therewasneither starnormoon.Notuntilthegreyofdawndidheallowthem to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by thesagofhisshoulderstobeweary.Frodosatuponthehorse in a dark dream. They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards fromtheroad-side,andfellasleepimmediately.Theyseemed hardly to have closed their eyes when Glorfindel, who had sethimselftowatchwhiletheyslept,awokethemagain.The sun had now climbed far into the morning, and the clouds and mists of the night were gone. ‘Drink this!’ said Glorfindel to them, pouring for each in turn a little liquor from his silver-studded flask of leather. It wasclearasspringwaterandhadnotaste,anditdidnotfeel either cool or warm in the mouth; but strength and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs as they drank it. Eaten after that draught the stale bread and dried fruit (which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done. Theyhadrestedratherlessthanfivehourswhentheytook to the Road again. Glorfindel still urged them on, and only allowed two brief halts during the day’s march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before nightfall, and came to a point where the Road bent right and ran down towards
flight to the ford 277 thebottomofthevalley,nowmakingstraightforthe Bruinen. So far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or hear; but often Glorfindel would halt and listenfor amoment, if theylagged behind,and a lookof anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue. But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumblingalongdizzywithweariness,andunabletothinkof anythingbuttheirfeetandlegs.Frodo’spainhadredoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows of ghostly grey. He almost welcomed the coming of night, for then the world seemed less pale and empty. Thehobbitswerestillweary,whentheysetoutagainearly next morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and they hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage. ‘Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,’ said Glorfindel; ‘for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us, and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.’ The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there was now in places much grass at either side, in which the hobbits walked when they could, to ease their tired feet. In thelate afternoonthey cametoa placewherethe Roadwent suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes ran along as they hurried forward; and there seemed to be a sound of many footfalls following their own. All at once, as if through a gate of light, the Road ran out again from the end of the tunnel into the open. There at the bottom of a sharp incline they saw before them a long flat mile, and beyond that the Ford of Rivendell. On the further side was a steep brown bank, threaded by a winding path; and behind that the tall mountains climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky.
278 the fellowship of the ring There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting behind them; a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and pouring through the branches of the pines. One moment Glorfindel turned and listened, then he sprang forward with a loud cry. ‘Fly!’ he called. ‘Fly! The enemy is upon us!’ The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down theslope.Glorfindeland Striderfollowedasrearguard.They were only half way across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of the gate in the trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined his horse in, andhalted,swayinginhissaddle.Anotherfollowedhim,and then another; then again two more. ‘Ride forward! Ride!’ cried Glorfindel to Frodo. He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking the horse to a walk, he turned and looked back. The Riders seemed to sit upon their great steeds like threatening statues upon a hill, dark and solid, while all the woods and land about them receded as if into a mist. Sud- denly he knew in his heart that they were silently command- ing him to wait. Then at once fear and hatred awoke in him. Hishandleftthebridleandgrippedthehiltofhissword,and with a red flash he drew it. ‘Ride on! Ride on!’ cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he called to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth! At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the windalongthelastlapofthe Road.Atthesamemomentthe black horses leaped down the hill in pursuit, and from the Riderscameaterriblecry,suchas Frodohadheardfilling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It was answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends out from the trees and rocks away on the left four other Riders came flying. Two rode towards Frodo; two galloped madly towards the Ford to cut off his escape. They seemed to him to runlike the windand to growswiftly larger anddarker, as their courses converged with his.
flight to the ford 279 Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no longer see his friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even their great steeds were no match in speed for the white elf-horse of Glorfindel. He looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the Ford before he was cut off by the others that had lain in ambush. He could see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black cloaks, and they were robed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, and they called to him with fell voices. Fear now filled all Frodo’s mind. He thought no longer of hissword.Nocrycamefromhim.Heshuthiseyesandclung to the horse’s mane. The wind whistled in his ears, and the bellsupontheharnessrangwildandshrill.Abreathofdeadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a flash of white fire, the elf-horse speeding as if on wings, passed right before the face of the foremost Rider. Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford. But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the horse halted and turned about neighing fiercely. There were Nine Riders at the water’s edge below, and Frodo’sspiritquailedbeforethethreatoftheirupliftedfaces. He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossing as easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge of Rivendell, if once the Riders crossed. In any case he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt. Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse. Suddenlytheforemost Riderspurredhishorseforward.It checkedatthewaterandrearedup.Withagreateffort Frodo sat upright and brandished his sword. ‘Go back!’ he cried. ‘Go back to the Land of Mordor, and
280 the fellowship of the ring follow me no more!’ His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The Riders halted, but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him with a harsh and chilling laughter. ‘Come back! Come back!’ they called. ‘To Mordor we will take you!’ ‘Go back!’ he whispered. ‘The Ring! The Ring!’ they cried with deadly voices; and immediately their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two others. ‘By Elbereth and Lu´thien the Fair,’ said Frodo with a last effort, lifting up his sword, ‘you shall have neither the Ring nor me!’ Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his tongue cleave to his mouth, and his heart labouring. His sword broke and fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore. Atthatmomenttherecamearoaringandarushing:anoise of loud waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the riverbelowhimrise,anddownalongitscoursetherecamea plumed cavalry of waves. White flames seemed to Frodo to flicker on their crests, and he half fancied that he saw amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three Riders that were still in the midst of the Ford were overwhelmed: they disappeared, buried suddenly under angry foam. Those that were behind drew back in dismay. Withhislastfailingsenses Frodoheardcries,anditseemed to him that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure of white light; and behind it ran small shadowyformswavingflames,thatflaredredinthegreymist that was falling over the world. The black horses were filled with madness, and leaping forwardinterrortheyboretheirridersintotherushingflood. Their piercing cries were drowned in the roaring of the river
flight to the ford 281 as it carried them away. Then Frodo felt himself falling, and the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more.
.
BOOK TWO
.
Chapter 1 MANY MEETINGS Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that he had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream thatstillhoveredontheedgeofmemory.Orperhapshehad beenill?Buttheceilinglookedstrange;itwasflat,andithad dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longer looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the sound of a waterfall. ‘Where am I, and what is the time?’ he said aloud to the ceiling. ‘In the house of Elrond, and it is ten o’clock in the morn- ing,’ said a voice. ‘It is the morning of October the twenty- fourth, if you want to know.’ ‘Gandalf!’cried Frodo,sittingup.Therewastheoldwizard, sitting in a chair by the open window. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after all the absurd things you have done since you left home.’ Frodolaydownagain.Hefelttoocomfortableandpeaceful to argue, and in any case he did not think he would get the better of an argument. He was fully awake now, and the memory of his journey was returning: the disastrous ‘short cut’ through the Old Forest; the ‘accident’ at The Prancing Pony; and his madness in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his arriving in Rivendell,therewasalongsilence,brokenonlybythesoft puffsof Gandalf’spipe,asheblewwhitesmoke-ringsoutof the window. ‘Where’s Sam?’Frodoaskedatlength.‘Andaretheothers all right?’
286 the fellowship of the ring ‘Yes,theyareallsafeandsound,’answered Gandalf.‘Sam was here until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.’ ‘What happened at the Ford?’ said Frodo. ‘It all seemed so dim, somehow; and it still does.’ ‘Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have been beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you showed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the most dangerous moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.’ ‘You seem to know a great deal already,’ said Frodo. ‘I have not spoken to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible, and afterwards there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?’ ‘You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,’ said Gandalf gently, ‘and it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory. Do not worry! Though I said ‘‘absurd’’ just now,Ididnotmeanit.Ithinkwellofyou–andoftheothers. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such dangers, still bearing the Ring.’ ‘Weshouldneverhavedoneitwithout Strider,’said Frodo. ‘Butweneededyou.Ididnotknowwhattodowithoutyou.’ ‘I was delayed,’ said Gandalf, ‘and that nearly proved our ruin. And yet I am not sure: it may have been better so.’ ‘I wish you would tell me what happened!’ ‘All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything today, by Elrond’s orders.’ ‘Buttalkingwouldstopmethinkingandwondering,which are quite as tiring,’ said Frodo. ‘I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at least.’ ‘You will soon hear all you wish to know,’ said Gandalf. ‘Weshallhavea Council,assoonasyouarewellenough.At the moment I will only say that I was held captive.’ ‘You?’ cried Frodo.
many meetings 287 ‘Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,’ said the wizard solemnly. ‘There are many powers in the world, for good or for evil. Somearegreaterthan Iam.Againstsome Ihavenotyetbeen measured. But my time is coming. The Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!’ ‘Thenyouknewofthe Ridersalready–before Imetthem?’ ‘Yes,Iknewofthem.Indeed Ispokeofthemoncetoyou; for the Black Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings. But I did not know that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at once. I heard newsofthemonlyafter Ileftyouin June;butthatstorymust wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.’ ‘Yes,’ said Frodo, ‘it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of him at first. Sam never quite trusted him, I think, not at any rate until we met Glorfindel.’ Gandalf smiled. ‘I have heard all about Sam,’ he said. ‘He has no more doubts now.’ ‘I am glad,’ said Frodo. ‘For I have become very fond of Strider. Well, fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he is strange, and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I didn’t know that any of the Big Peoplewerelikethat. Ithought,well,thattheywere justbig, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked like Bill Ferny. But then we don’t know much about Men in the Shire, except perhaps the Bree-landers.’ ‘You don’t know much even about them, if you think old Barliman is stupid,’ said Gandalf. ‘He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks less than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (as they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.’ ‘Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of theold Kings?’said Frodoinwonder.‘Ithoughttheyhadall vanished long ago. I thought he was only a Ranger.’
288 the fellowship of the ring ‘Only a Ranger!’ cried Gandalf. ‘My dear Frodo, that is just what the Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of thegreatpeople,the Menofthe West.Theyhavehelpedme before; and I shall need their help in the days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at rest.’ ‘I suppose not,’ said Frodo. ‘But so far my only thought has been to get here; and I hope I shan’t have to go any further. It is very pleasant just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has been as much as I want.’ He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. ‘I have been reckoning,’ he said, ‘and I can’t bring the total up to October the twenty-fourth. It ought to be the twenty-first. We must have reached the Ford by the twentieth.’ ‘Youhavetalkedandreckonedmorethanisgoodforyou,’ said Gandalf. ‘How do the side and shoulder feel now?’ ‘I don’t know,’ Frodo answered. ‘They don’t feel at all: which is an improvement, but’ – he made an effort – ‘I can move my arm again a little. Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,’ he added, touching his left hand with his right. ‘Good!’said Gandalf.‘Itismendingfast.Youwillsoonbe sound again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were brought in.’ ‘Days?’ said Frodo. ‘Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves broughtyoufromthe Fordonthenightofthetwentieth,and that is where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has hardly left your side, day or night, except to runmessages.Elrondisamasterofhealing,buttheweapons of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the truth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment of thebladestillintheclosedwound.Butitcouldnotbefound untillastnight.Then Elrondremovedasplinter.Itwasdeeply buried, and it was working inwards.’ Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that had vanished in Strider’s hands. ‘Don’t
many meetings 289 bealarmed!’said Gandalf.‘Itisgonenow.Ithasbeenmelted. Anditseemsthat Hobbitsfadeveryreluctantly.Ihaveknown strong warriors of the Big People who would quickly have beenovercomebythatsplinter,whichyouboreforseventeen days.’ ‘What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. ‘What were the Riders trying to do?’ ‘Theytriedtopierceyourheartwitha Morgul-knifewhich remains in the wound. If they had succeeded, you would havebecomeliketheyare,onlyweakerandundertheircom- mand.Youwouldhavebecomeawraithunderthedominion of the Dark Lord; and he would have tormented you for trying to keep his Ring, if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it and seeing it on his hand.’ ‘Thankgoodness Ididnotrealizethehorribledanger!’said Frodo faintly. ‘I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I should not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!’ ‘Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,’ said Gandalf, ‘not to mention courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow shave, so to speak.Youwereingravestperilwhileyouworethe Ring,for then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have seized you. You could see them, and they could see you.’ ‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘They were terrible to behold! But why could we all see their horses?’ ‘Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are real robes that they wear to give shape to their nothingness when they have dealings with the living.’ ‘Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All other animals are terrified when they draw near, even the elf-horse of Glorfindel. The dogs howl and the geese scream at them.’ ‘Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels
290 the fellowship of the ring are wraiths! There are orcs and trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have been and still are many Men, warriorsandkings,thatwalkaliveunderthe Sun,andyetare under his sway. And their number is growing daily.’ ‘What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’ ‘Yes,atpresent,untilallelseisconquered.The Elvesmay fear the Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but never againwilltheylistentohimorservehim.Andherein Riven- delltherelivestillsomeofhischieffoes:the Elven-wise,lords ofthe Eldarfrom beyondthe furthestseas.They donot fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the Blessed Realmliveatonceinbothworlds,andagainstboththe Seen and the Unseen they have great power.’ ‘I thought that I saw a white figure that shone and did not grow dim like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?’ ‘Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the mighty of the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord of a house of princes. Indeed there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: and elsewhere otherpowersstilldwell.Thereispower,too,ofanotherkind in the Shire. But all such places will soon become islands undersiege,ifthingsgoonastheyaregoing.The Dark Lord is putting forth all his strength. ‘Still,’ he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin,whilehisbeardwentstiffandstraightlikebristlingwire, ‘we must keep up our courage. You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to death. You are in Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.’ ‘I haven’t any courage to keep up,’ said Frodo, ‘but I am notworriedatthemoment.Justgivemenewsofmyfriends, and tell me the end of the affair at the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be content for the present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think; but I shan’t be able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.’ Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside and took a good lookat Frodo.Thecolourhadcomebacktohisface,andhis eyes were clear, and fully awake and aware. He was smiling,
many meetings 291 and there seemed to be little wrong with him. But to the wizard’seyetherewasafaintchange,justahintasitwereof transparency, about him, and especially about the left hand that lay outside upon the coverlet. ‘Still that must be expected,’ said Gandalf to himself. ‘He is not half through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond can foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may becomelikeaglassfilledwithaclearlightforeyestoseethat can.’ ‘You look splendid,’ he said aloud. ‘I will risk a brief tale without consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again. This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders made straight for you, as soon as youfled.Theydidnotneedtheguidanceoftheirhorsesany longer:youhadbecomevisibletothem,beingalreadyonthe thresholdoftheirworld.Andalsothe Ringdrewthem.Your friends sprang aside, off the road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save you, if the white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to over- take, and too many to oppose. On foot even Glorfindel and Aragorn together could not withstand all the Nine at once. ‘When the Ringwraiths swept by, your friends ran up behind. Close to the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by a few stunted trees. There they hastily kindled fire; for Glorfindel knew that a flood would come down,ifthe Riderstriedtocross,andthenhewouldhaveto deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The moment the flood appeared, he rushed out, followed by Aragornandtheotherswithflamingbrands.Caughtbetween fire and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in his wrath, theyweredismayed,andtheirhorseswerestrickenwithmad- ness.Threewerecarriedawaybythefirstassaultoftheflood; theotherswerenowhurledintothewaterbytheirhorsesand overwhelmed.’ ‘And is that the end of the Black Riders?’ asked Frodo. ‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Their horses must have perished, and without them they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths
292 the fellowship of the ring themselves cannot be so easily destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your friends crossed after the flood had passed and they found you lying on your face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under you. The horse was standing guard beside you. You were pale and cold, and they feared that you were dead, or worse. Elrond’s folk met them, carrying you slowly towards Rivendell.’ ‘Who made the flood?’ asked Frodo. ‘Elrond commanded it,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The river of this valley is under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the flood was released. If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you may not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white horses with shining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding boulders. For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a wrath, and the flood would get out of hand and wash you all away. There is great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.’ ‘Yes,itallcomesbacktomenow,’said Frodo:‘thetremen- dousroaring.Ithought Iwasdrowning,withmyfriendsand enemies and all. But now we are safe!’ Gandalflookedquicklyat Frodo,buthehadshuthiseyes. ‘Yes, you are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feastingandmerrymakingtocelebratethevictoryatthe Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in places of honour.’ ‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel and such great lords, not to mention Strider, shouldtakesomuchtroubleandshowmesomuchkindness.’ ‘Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf,smiling.‘Iamonegoodreason.The Ringisanother: you are the Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.’ ‘Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. ‘I wonder where he is. I wish he was here and could hear all about it. It would have
many meetings 293 made him laugh. The cow jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that he fell fast asleep. Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea. That house was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, ‘a perfect house, whether you like food or sleep or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixtureofthemall’.Merelytobetherewasacureforweari- ness, fear, and sadness. As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that he no longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He got out of bed and discovered that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever had been.Hefoundlaidreadycleangarmentsofgreencloththat fitted him excellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled to seeamuchthinnerreflectionofhimselfthanheremembered: it looked remarkably like the young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully. ‘Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a looking-glass,’ he said to his reflection. ‘But now for a merry meeting!’ He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune. At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came in. He ran to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it gently and then he blushed and turned hastily away. ‘Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo. ‘It’s warm!’ said Sam. ‘Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so cold through the long nights. But glory and trum- pets!’ he cried, turning round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. ‘It’s fine to see you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.’ ‘I am ready,’ said Frodo. ‘Let’s go and look for the rest of the party!’
294 the fellowship of the ring ‘I can take you to them, sir,’ said Sam. ‘It’s a big house this, and very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what you’ll find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there! Some like kings, terrible and splendid;andsomeasmerry aschildren.Andthemusicand the singing – not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening since we got here. But I’m getting to know some of the ways of the place.’ ‘I know what you have been doing, Sam,’ said Frodo, taking his arm. ‘But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to yourheart’scontent.Comeon,guidemeroundthecorners!’ Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out into a high garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting in a porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the valley below, but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far above. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling water was loud, and the evening was filled with a faint scent of trees and flowers, as if summer still lingered in Elrond’s gardens. ‘Hurray!’ cried Pippin, springing up. ‘Here is our noble cousin! Make way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!’ ‘Hush!’ said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. ‘Evil things do not come into this valley; but all the sameweshouldnotnamethem.The Lordofthe Ringisnot Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world. We are sitting in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’ ‘Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said Pippin. ‘He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible, somehow, to feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the right song for the occasion.’ ‘I feel like singing myself,’ laughed Frodo. ‘Though at the moment I feel more like eating and drinking.’ ‘That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. ‘You have shown your usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’
many meetings 295 ‘More than a meal! A feast!’ said Merry. ‘As soon as Gandalf reported that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had hardly finished speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. The hall of Elrond’s house was filled with folk: Elves for the most part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was his custom, sat in a great chair at the end of thelongtableuponthedais;andnexttohimontheoneside sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf. Frodo looked at them in wonder; for he had never before seen Elrond, of whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left, Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were revealed as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other two; but his long white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged face under great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could leap suddenly into fire. Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright and keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and in his hand was strength. The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale as a tried warrior in the fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men. In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall, there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a ladyfairtolookupon,andsolikewassheinformofwoman- hood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that she was one of his
296 the fellowship of the ring close kindred. Young she was and yet not so. The braids of her dark hair were touched by no frost; her white arms and clear face were flawless and smooth, and the light of stars was in her bright eyes, grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge were in her glance, as of one who has known many things that the years bring. Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver lacenettedwithsmallgems,glitteringwhite;buthersoftgrey raiment had no ornament save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver. So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen; Arwen, daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that thelikenessof Lu´thienhadcomeonearthagain;andshewas called Undo´miel, for she was the Evenstar of her people. Longshehadbeeninthelandofhermother’skin,in Lo´rien beyondthemountains,andwasbutlatelyreturnedto Riven- dell to her father’s house. But her brothers, Elladan and Elrohir,wereoutuponerrantry;fortheyrodeoftenfarafield withthe Rangersofthe North,forgettingnevertheirmother’s torment in the dens of the orcs. Suchlovelinessinlivingthing Frodohadneverseenbefore nor imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashedtofindthathehadaseatat Elrond’stableamongall these folk so high and fair. Though he had a suitable chair, andwasraiseduponseveralcushions,hefeltverysmall,and ratheroutofplace;butthatfeelingquicklypassed.Thefeast was merry and the food all that his hunger could desire. It was some time before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours. He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper end of one of the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of Strider. Nextto Frodoonhisrightsatadwarfofimportantappear- ance, richly dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was
many meetings 297 white,nearlyaswhiteasthesnow-whiteclothofhisgarments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him. ‘Welcome and well met!’ said the dwarf, turning towards him. Then he actually rose from his seat and bowed. ‘Glo´in at your service,’ he said, and bowed still lower. ‘Frodo Baggins at your service and your family’s,’ said Frodocorrectly,risinginsurpriseandscatteringhiscushions. ‘Am I right in guessing that you are the Glo´in, one of the twelve companions of the great Thorin Oakenshield?’ ‘Quite right,’ answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions and courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. ‘And I do not ask, for I have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.’ ‘Thank you very much,’ said Frodo. ‘You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,’ said Glo´in. ‘I wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey. Nothing like it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?’ ‘I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,’ said Frodo politely. He guessed that even in Elrond’s house the matter of the Ring was not one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his troubles for a time. ‘But I am equally curious,’headded,‘tolearnwhatbringssoimportantadwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.’ Glo´inlookedathim.‘Ifyouhavenotheard,Ithinkwewill not speak yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us allerelong,Ibelieve,andthenweshallallhearmanythings. But there is much else that may be told.’ Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but Frodolistenedmorethanhespoke;forthenewsofthe Shire, apart from the Ring, seemed small and far-away and unim- portant,while Glo´inhadmuchtotellofeventsinthenorthern regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn the Old, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men,
298 the fellowship of the ring and to their land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go. ‘Indeed,’ said Glo´in, ‘if it were not for the Beornings, the passagefrom Daleto Rivendellwouldlongagohavebecome impossible. They are valiant men and keep open the High Pass and the Ford of Carrock. But their tolls are high,’ he added with a shake of his head; ‘and like Beorn of old they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and that ismuchinthesedays.Nowherearethereanymensofriendly to us as the Men of Dale. They are good folk, the Bardings. The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules them, Brand son of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.’ ‘And what of your own people?’ asked Frodo. ‘There is much to tell, good and bad,’ said Glo´in; ‘yet it is mostly good: we have so far been fortunate, though we do not escape the shadow of these times. If you really wish to hear of us, I will tell you tidings gladly. But stop me when you are weary! Dwarves’ tongues run on when speaking of their handiwork, they say.’ And with that Glo´in embarked on a long account of the doings of the Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have foundsopolitealistener;for Frodoshowednosignofweari- ness and made no attempt to change the subject, though actually he soon got rather lost among the strange names of people andplaces that he hadnever heard ofbefore. He was interested, however, to hear that Da´in was still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having passed his two hundredandfiftiethyear),venerable,andfabulouslyrich.Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armiessevenwerestillwithhim:Dwalin,Glo´in,Dori,Nori, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him. ‘And what has become of Balin and Ori and O´in?’ asked Frodo. A shadow passed over Glo´in’s face. ‘We do not know,’ he
many meetings 299 answered. ‘It is largely on account of Balin that I have come toasktheadviceofthosethatdwellin Rivendell.Buttonight let us speak of merrier things!’ Glo´in began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodoabouttheirgreatlaboursin Daleandunderthe Moun- tain. ‘We have done well,’ he said. ‘But in metal-work we cannot rival our fathers, many of whose secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot again makemailorbladetomatchthosethatweremadebeforethe dragoncame.Onlyinminingandbuildinghavewesurpassed the old days. You should see the waterways of Dale, Frodo, and the fountains, and the pools! You should see the stone- paved roads of many colours! And the halls and cavernous streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the terraces and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then you would see that we have not been idle.’ ‘I will comeand see them, ifever I can,’ said Frodo. ‘How surprised Bilbowouldhavebeentoseeallthechangesinthe Desolation of Smaug!’ Glo´inlookedat Frodoandsmiled.‘Youwereveryfondof Bilbo were you not?’ he asked. ‘Yes,’answered Frodo.‘Iwouldratherseehimthanallthe towers and palaces in the world.’ Atlengththefeastcametoanend.Elrondand Arwenrose and went down the hall, and the company followed them in due order. The doors were thrown open, and they went across a wide passage and through other doors, and came into a further hall. In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side. Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. ‘This is the Hallof Fire,’saidthewizard.‘Hereyouwillhearmanysongs and tales – if you can keep awake. But except on high days itusuallystandsemptyandquiet,andpeoplecomeherewho wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all the year round, but there is little other light.’
300 the fellowship of the ring As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him,Elvishminstrelsbegantomakesweetmusic.Slowlythe hall filled,and Frodo looked withdelight upon themany fair faces that were gathered together; the golden firelight played uponthemandshimmeredintheirhair.Suddenlyhenoticed, not far from the further end of the fire, a small dark figure seatedonastoolwithhisbackproppedagainstapillar.Beside him on the ground was a drinking-cup and some bread. Frodowonderedwhetherhewasill(ifpeoplewereeverillin Rivendell), and had been unable to come to the feast. His head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark cloak was drawn over his face. Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent figure. ‘Awake, littlemaster!’ hesaid, with asmile. Then,turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. ‘Now at last the hour has come that you have wished for, Frodo,’ he said. ‘Here is a friend that you have long missed.’ The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. ‘Bilbo!’ cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward. ‘Hullo,Frodomylad!’said Bilbo.‘Soyouhavegothereat last. I hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in your honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?’ ‘Why weren’t you there?’ cried Frodo. ‘And why haven’t I been allowed to see you before?’ ‘Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast, I don’t go in for such things much now. And I had something else to do.’ ‘What were you doing?’ ‘Why,sittingandthinking.Idoalotofthatnowadays,and this is the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ hesaid,cockinganeyeat Elrond.Therewasabrighttwinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness that Frodo could see. ‘Wake up! I was not asleep, Master Elrond. If you want to know, you have all come out from your feast too soon, and you
many meetings 301 have disturbed me – in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck over a line or two, and was thinking about them; but now I don’t suppose I shall ever get them right. There willbesuchadealofsingingthattheideaswillbedrivenclean outofmyhead.Ishallhavetogetmyfriendthe Du´nadanto help me. Where is he?’ Elrond laughed. ‘He shall be found,’ he said. ‘Then you two shall go into a corner and finish your task, and we will hearitandjudgeitbeforeweendourmerrymaking.’Messen- gersweresenttofind Bilbo’sfriend,thoughnoneknewwhere he was, or why he had not been present at the feast. In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Samcamequicklyandplacedhimselfnearthem.Theytalked together in soft voices, oblivious of the mirth and music in the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of himself. When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, alongthe Roadorinthecountryoneitherside;butsomehow he had steered all the time towards Rivendell. ‘I got here without much adventure,’ he said, ‘and after a rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan’t travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here I have been. I have done this and that. Ihavewrittensomemoreofmybook.And,ofcourse,Imake up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to please me,Ithink;for,ofcourse,theyaren’treallygoodenoughfor Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn’t seem to pass here: it just is. A remarkable place altogether. ‘I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and outofthe South,buthardlyanythingfromthe Shire.Iheard about the Ring, of course. Gandalf has been here often. Not that he has told me a great deal, he has become closer than ever these last few years. The Du´nadan has told me more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It is a pity that Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I could have brought the thing here myself long ago without so much trouble.Ihavethoughtseveraltimesofgoingbackto Hobbi- ton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let me:
302 the fellowship of the ring Gandalf and Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught me tottering about in the Wild. ‘And Gandalf said: ‘‘The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do no good to you or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again.’’ Odd sort of remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let things be. I am fright- fully glad to see you safe and sound.’ He paused and looked at Frodo doubtfully. ‘Have you got it here?’ he asked in a whisper. ‘I can’t help feeling curious, you know, after all I’ve heard. I should very much like just to peep at it again.’ ‘Yes, I’ve got it,’ answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluc- tance. ‘It looks just the same as ever it did.’ ‘Well, I should just like to see it fora moment,’ said Bilbo. When hehad dressed,Frodo found thatwhile heslept the Ringhadbeenhungabouthisneckonanewchain,lightbut strong. Slowly he drew it out. Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodoquicklydrewbackthe Ring.Tohisdistressandamaze- ment he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a shadow seemed to have fallen between them, and through it he found himself eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungryfaceandbonygropinghands.Hefeltadesiretostrike him. The music and singing round them seemed to falter, and asilencefell.Bilbolookedquicklyat Frodo’sfaceandpassed his hand across his eyes. ‘I understand now,’ he said. ‘Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have come in for this burden; sorry about everything. Don’t adventures ever have an end? Isupposenot.Someoneelsealwayshastocarryonthestory. Well, it can’t be helped. I wonder if it’s any good trying to finish my book? But don’t let’s worry about it now – let’s have some real News! Tell me all about the Shire!’ Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly a shred of memory. The light and music of Rivendell
many meetings 303 was about him again. Bilbo smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo could tell – aided and corrected now and again by Sam – was of the greatest interest to him, from the felling of the least tree to the pranks of the smallest child in Hobbiton. They were so deep in the doings of the Four Farthings that they did not noticethearrivalofamancladindarkgreencloth.Formany minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile. Suddenly Bilbolookedup.‘Ah,thereyouareatlast,Du´n- adan!’ he cried. ‘Strider!’ said Frodo. ‘You seem to have a lot of names.’ ‘Well, Strider is one that I haven’t heard before, anyway,’ said Bilbo. ‘What do you call him that for?’ ‘Theycallmethatin Bree,’said Striderlaughing,‘andthat is how I was introduced to him.’ ‘And why do you call him Du´nadan?’ asked Frodo. ‘The Du´nadan,’ said Bilbo. ‘He is often called that here. But I thought you knew enough Elvish at least to know du´n- adan:Manofthe West,Nu´meno´rean.Butthisisnotthetime forlessons!’Heturnedto Strider.‘Wherehaveyoubeen,my friend? Why weren’t you at the feast? The Lady Arwen was there.’ Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. ‘I know,’ he said. ‘But often I must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wild unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.’ ‘Well, my dear fellow,’ said Bilbo, ‘now you’ve heard the news, can’t you spare me a moment? I want your help in something urgent. Elrond says this song of mine is to be finished before the end of the evening, and I am stuck. Let’s go off into a corner and polish it up!’ Strider smiled. ‘Come then!’ he said. ‘Let me hear it!’ Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen asleep. He was alone and felt rather forlorn, although all abouthimthefolkof Rivendellweregathered.Butthosenear him were silent, intent upon the music of the voices and the
304 the fellowship of the ring instruments, and they gave no heed to anything else. Frodo began to listen. At first the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven words in elven-tongues, even though he understood them little, held him in a spell, as soon as he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took shape, and visions of far lands and bright things that he had never yet imagined opened out before him; and the firelit hall became like a golden mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the world. Then the enchantment became more and more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless river of swelling gold and silver was flowing over him, too multitu- dinousforitspatterntobecomprehended;itbecamepartof the throbbing air about him, and it drenched and drowned him. Swiftly he sank under its shining weight into a deep realm of sleep. There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned intorunningwater,andthensuddenlyintoavoice.Itseemed to be the voice of Bilbo chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words. Ea¨rendil was a mariner that tarried in Arvernien; he built a boat of timber felled in Nimbrethil to journey in; her sails he wove of silver fair, of silver were her lanterns made, her prow he fashioned like a swan, and light upon her banners laid. In panoply of ancient kings, in chaine´d rings he armoured him; his shining shield was scored with runes to ward all wounds and harm from him; his bow was made of dragon-horn, his arrows shorn of ebony, of silver was his habergeon,
many meetings 305 his scabbard of chalcedony; his sword of steel was valiant, of adamant his helmet tall, an eagle-plume upon his crest, upon his breast an emerald. Beneath the Moon and under star he wandered far from northern strands, bewildered on enchanted ways beyond the days of mortal lands. From gnashing of the Narrow Ice where shadow lies on frozen hills, from nether heats and burning waste he turned in haste, and roving still on starless waters far astray at last he came to Night of Naught, and passed, and never sight he saw of shining shore nor light he sought. The winds of wrath came driving him, and blindly in the foam he fled from west to east, and errandless, unheralded he homeward sped. There flying Elwing came to him, and flame was in the darkness lit; more bright than light of diamond the fire upon her carcanet. The Silmaril she bound on him and crowned him with the living light, and dauntless then with burning brow he turned his prow; and in the night from Otherworld beyond the Sea there strong and free a storm arose, a wind of power in Tarmenel; by paths that seldom mortal goes his boat it bore with biting breath as might of death across the grey
306 the fellowship of the ring and long-forsaken seas distressed: from east to west he passed away. Through Evernight he back was borne on black and roaring waves that ran o’er leagues unlit and foundered shores that drowned before the Days began, until he heard on strands of pearl where ends the world the music long, where ever-foaming billows roll the yellow gold and jewels wan. He saw the Mountain silent rise where twilight lies upon the knees of Valinor, and Eldamar beheld afar beyond the seas. A wanderer escaped from night to haven white he came at last, to Elvenhome the green and fair where keen the air, where pale as glass beneath the Hill of Ilmarin a-glimmer in a valley sheer the lamplit towers of Tirion are mirrored on the Shadowmere. He tarried there from errantry, and melodies they taught to him, and sages old him marvels told, and harps of gold they brought to him. They clothed him then in elven-white, and seven lights before him sent, as through the Calacirian to hidden land forlorn he went. He came unto the timeless halls where shining fall the countless years, and endless reigns the Elder King in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer; and words unheard were spoken then
many meetings 307 of folk of Men and Elven-kin, beyond the world were visions showed forbid to those that dwell therein. A ship then new they built for him of mithril and of elven-glass with shining prow; no shaven oar nor sail she bore on silver mast: the Silmaril as lantern light and banner bright with living flame to gleam thereon by Elbereth herself was set, who thither came and wings immortal made for him, and laid on him undying doom, to sail the shoreless skies and come behind the Sun and light of Moon. From Evereven’s lofty hills where softly silver fountains fall his wings him bore, a wandering light, beyond the mighty Mountain Wall. From World’s End then he turned away, and yearned again to find afar his home through shadows journeying, and burning as an island star on high above the mists he came, a distant flame before the Sun, a wonder ere the waking dawn where grey the Norland waters run. And over Middle-earth he passed and heard at last the weeping sore of women and of elven-maids in Elder Days, in years of yore. But on him mighty doom was laid, till Moon should fade, an orbe´d star to pass, and tarry never more
308 the fellowship of the ring on Hither Shores where mortals are; for ever still a herald on an errand that should never rest to bear his shining lamp afar, the Flammifer of Westernesse. The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that Bilbowasseatedonhisstoolinacircleoflisteners,whowere smiling and applauding. ‘Now we had better have it again,’ said an Elf. Bilbo got up and bowed. ‘I am flattered, Lindir,’ he said. ‘But it would be too tiring to repeat it all.’ ‘Nottootiringforyou,’the Elvesansweredlaughing.‘You know you are never tired of reciting your own verses. But really we cannot answer your question at one hearing!’ ‘What!’cried Bilbo.‘Youcan’ttellwhichpartsweremine, and which were the Du´nadan’s?’ ‘It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals,’ said the Elf. ‘Nonsense,Lindir,’snorted Bilbo.‘Ifyoucan’tdistinguish betweena Mananda Hobbit,yourjudgementispoorerthan I imagined. They’re as different as peas and apples.’ ‘Maybe.Tosheepothersheepnodoubtappeardifferent,’ laughed Lindir.‘Ortoshepherds.But Mortalshavenotbeen our study. We have other business.’ ‘I won’t argue with you,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am sleepy after so muchmusic and singing. I’ll leave you to guess, if you want to.’ Hegotupandcametowards Frodo.‘Well,that’sover,’he saidinalowvoice.‘Itwentoffbetterthan Iexpected.Idon’t often get asked for a second hearing. What did you think of it?’ ‘I am not going to try and guess,’ said Frodo smiling. ‘You needn’t,’ said Bilbo. ‘As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except that Aragorn insisted on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it important. I don’t know why. Otherwiseheobviouslythoughtthewholethingratherabove
many meetings 309 my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses about Ea¨rendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was right.’ ‘Idon’tknow,’said Frodo.‘Itseemedtometofitsomehow, though I can’t explain. I was half asleep when you began, anditseemedtofollowonfromsomethingthat Iwasdream- ingabout.Ididn’tunderstandthatitwasreallyyouspeaking until near the end.’ ‘It is difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it,’ said Bilbo. ‘Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the Elvishappetiteformusicandpoetryandtales.Theyseemto like them as much as food, or more. They will be going on foralongtimeyet.Whatdoyousaytoslippingoffforsome more quiet talk?’ ‘Can we?’ said Frodo. ‘Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and go as you like, as long as you don’t make a noise.’ They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and madeforthedoors.Samtheyleftbehind,fastasleepstillwith asmileonhisface.Inspiteofhisdelightin Bilbo’scompany Frodo felt a tug of regret as they passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped over the threshold a single clear voice rose in song. A Elbereth Gilthoniel, silivren penna m´ıriel o menel aglar elenath! Na-chaered palan-d´ıriel o galadhremmin ennorath, Fanuilos, le linnathon nef aear, s´ı nef aearon! Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in his chair and the fire was on his face like summer-light upon the trees. Near him sat the Lady Arwen. To his surprise Frodo saw that Aragorn stood beside her; his dark cloak was
310 the fellowship of the ring thrown back, and he seemed to be clad in elven-mail, and a starshone onhis breast.Theyspoke together,andthen sud- denly it seemed to Frodo that Arwen turned towards him, and the light of her eyes fell on him from afar and pierced his heart. He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the Elvishsongfelllikeclearjewelsofblendedwordandmelody. ‘Itisasongto Elbereth,’said Bilbo.‘Theywillsingthat,and othersongsofthe Blessed Realm,manytimestonight.Come on!’ He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the gardens and looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen. There they sat for some while, looking through the window at the bright stars above the steep-climbing woods, and talking softly. They spoke no more of the small news of the Shire far away, nor of the dark shadows and perils that encompassed them, but of the fair things they had seen in theworldtogether,ofthe Elves,ofthestars,oftrees,andthe gentle fall of the bright year in the woods. At last there came a knock on the door. ‘Begging your pardon,’said Sam,puttinginhishead,‘but Iwasjustwonder- ing if you would be wanting anything.’ ‘And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,’ replied Bilbo. ‘I guess you mean that it is time your master went to bed.’ ‘Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear, and he only got up today for the first time.’ ‘Quite right, Sam,’ laughed Bilbo. ‘You can trot off and tell Gandalf that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been good to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should live to see your chapters of our story. Good night! I’ll take a walk, I think, and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!’
Chapter 2 THE COUNCIL OF ELROND Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along the terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen andwatched thepale, coolsun riseabove thefar mountains, and shine down, slanting through the thin silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the woven netsofgossamertwinkledoneverybush.Samwalkedbeside him, saying nothing, but sniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder in his eyes at the great heights in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks. On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. ‘Hullo! Good morning!’ said Bilbo. ‘Feel ready for the great council?’ ‘I feel ready for anything,’ answered Frodo. ‘But most of all I should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I shouldliketogetintothosepine-woodsupthere.’Hepointed away far up the side of Rivendell to the north. ‘Youmayhaveachancelater,’said Gandalf.‘Butwecannot makeanyplansyet.Thereismuchtohearanddecidetoday.’ Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. ‘That is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,’ cried Gandalf.‘Comealongnow!Bothyouand Bilboarewanted.’ Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten, trotted Sam. Gandalfledthemtotheporchwhere Frodohadfoundhis friends the evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the valley. The noise of bub- blingwaterscameupfromthefoamingriver-bed.Birdswere singing, and a wholesome peace lay on the land. To Frodo
312 the fellowship of the ring hisdangerousflight,andtherumoursofthedarknessgrowing in the world outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubleddream; butthe facesthat wereturned tomeet them as they entered were grave. Elrondwasthere,andseveralotherswereseatedinsilence about him. Frodo saw Glorfindel and Glo´in; and in a corner alone Strider was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes again.Elronddrew Frodotoaseatbyhisside,andpresented him to the company, saying: ‘Here,my friends,isthe hobbit,Frodoson of Drogo.Few have ever come hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.’ He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had not met before. There was a younger dwarf at Glo´in’s side: his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel there were several other counsellors of Elrond’s household, of whom Erestor was the chief;andwithhimwas Galdor,an Elffromthe Grey Havens who had come on an errand from C´ırdan the Shipwright. There was also a strange Elf clad in green and brown, Legolas,amessengerfromhisfather,Thranduil,the Kingof the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and grey-eyed, proud and stern of glance. He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horse- back; and indeed though his garments were rich, and his cloak was lined with fur, they were stained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in which a single white stone was set;hislockswereshornabouthisshoulders.Onabaldriche wore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon hisknees.Hegazedat Frodoand Bilbowithsuddenwonder. ‘Here,’said Elrond,turningto Gandalf,‘is Boromir,aman from the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I have bidden him to be present, for here his questions will be answered.’ Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be told. Much was said of events in the world outside,
the council of elrond 313 especially in the South, and in the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo had already heard many rumours;butthetaleof Glo´inwasnewtohim,andwhenthe dwarfspokehelistenedattentively.Itappearedthatamidthe splendour of their works of hand the hearts of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were troubled. ‘It is now many years ago,’ said Glo´in, ‘that a shadow of disquiet fell upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began to be whispered in secret: it was saidthatwewerehemmedinanarrowplace,andthatgreater wealthandsplendourwouldbefoundinawiderworld.Some spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers that are called in our own tongue Khazad-duˆm; and they declared that now at last we had the power and numbers to return.’ Glo´in sighed. ‘Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too deep we delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long have its vast mansions lain empty since the chil- drenof Durinfled.Butnowwespokeofitagainwithlonging, and yet with dread; for no dwarf has dared to pass the doors of Khazad-duˆmformanylivesofkings,save Thro´ronly,and he perished. At last, however, Balin listened to the whispers, and resolved to go; and though Da´in did not give leave will- ingly, he took with him Ori and O´in and many of our folk, and they went away south. ‘That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had news andit seemedgood: messagesreported that Moria had been entered and a great work begun there. Then there was silence, and no word has ever come from Moria since. ‘Thenaboutayearagoamessengercameto Da´in,butnot from Moria – from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Da´in to his gate. The Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would give for it, such as he gave of old. And he asked urgently concerning hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt. ‘‘For Sauron knows,’’ said he, ‘‘that one of these was known to you on a time.’’ ‘At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer.
314 the fellowship of the ring And then his fell voice was lowered, and he would have sweetened it if he could. ‘‘As a small token only of your friendship Sauron asks this,’’ he said: ‘‘that you should find this thief,’’ such was his word, ‘‘and get from him, willing or no, a little ring, the least of rings, that once he stole. It is but atrifle that Sauron fancies,and anearnestof yourgood will. Find it,and threerings that the Dwarf-sires possessedof old shall be returned to you, and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief, whether he still lives and where, and you shall have great reward and lasting friendship from the Lord. Refuse, and things will not seem so well. Do you refuse?’’ ‘Atthathisbreathcamelikethehissofsnakes,andallwho stood by shuddered, but Da´in said: ‘‘I say neither yea nor nay. I must consider this message and what it means under its fair cloak.’’ ‘‘‘Consider well, but not too long,’’ said he. ‘‘‘Thetimeofmythoughtismyowntospend,’’answered Da´in. ‘‘‘For the present,’’ said he, and rode into the darkness. ‘Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that night.Weneedednotthefellvoiceofthemessengertowarn us that his words held both menace and deceit; for we knew already that the power that has re-entered Mordor has not changed,andeveritbetrayedusofold.Twicethemessenger has returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and last time, so he says, is soon to come, before the ending of the year. ‘Andso Ihavebeensentatlastby Da´intowarn Bilbothat he is sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and draws nearer. We discover that messengers have come also to King Brand in Dale,andthatheisafraid.Wefearthathemayyield.Already warisgatheringonhiseasternborders.Ifwemakenoanswer, the Enemy may move Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Da´in also.’
the council of elrond 315 ‘You have done well to come,’ said Elrond. ‘You will hear today all that you need in order to understand the purposes of the Enemy. There is naught that you can do, other than toresist,withhopeorwithoutit.Butyoudonotstandalone. You will learn that your trouble is but part of the trouble of all the western world. The Ring! What shall we do with the Ring, the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we must deem. ‘Thatisthepurposeforwhichyouarecalledhither.Called, I say, though I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You have come and are here met, in this very nick of time, by chance as it may seem. Yet it is not so. Believe rather that it is so ordered that we, who sit here, and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world. ‘Now, therefore, things shall be openly spoken that have been hidden from all but a few until this day. And first, so thatallmayunderstandwhatistheperil,the Taleofthe Ring shall be told from the beginning even to this present. And I will begin that tale, though others shall end it.’ Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of Sauron and the Rings of Power, and their forging in the Second Age of the world long ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the full tale to none, and many eyes were turned to Elrond in fear and wonder as he told of the Elven-smithsof Eregionandtheirfriendshipwith Moria, andtheireagernessforknowledge,bywhich Sauronensnared them.Forinthattimehewasnotyeteviltobehold,andthey receivedhisaidandgrewmightyincraft,whereashelearned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was aware of him, and hid the Three which he had made; and there was war, and the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut. Then through all the years that followed he traced the Ring; but since that history is elsewhere recounted, even as
316 the fellowship of the ring Elrond himself set it down in his books of lore, it is not here recalled. For it is a long tale, full of deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke, the sun rode up the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased. Of Nu´menorhespoke,itsgloryanditsfall,andthereturn of the Kings of Men to Middle-earth out of the deeps of the Sea, borne upon the wings of storm. Then Elendil the Tall andhismightysons,Isildurand Ana´rion,becamegreatlords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the South- realm in Gondor above the mouths of Anduin. But Sauron of Mordorassailedthem,andtheymadethe Last Allianceof Elves and Men, and the hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil were mustered in Arnor. Thereupon Elrondpausedawhileandsighed.‘Iremember well the splendour of their banners,’ he said. ‘It recalled to me the glory of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, somanygreatprincesandcaptainswereassembled.Andyet notsomany,norsofair,aswhen Thangorodrimwasbroken, andthe Elvesdeemedthatevilwasendedforever,anditwas not so.’ ‘You remember?’ said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud inhisastonishment.‘But Ithought,’hestammeredas Elrond turned towards him, ‘I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.’ ‘So it was indeed,’ answered Elrond gravely. ‘But my memory reaches back even to the Elder Days. Ea¨rendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of Lu´thien of Doriath.Ihaveseenthreeagesinthe Westoftheworld,and many defeats, and many fruitless victories. ‘I was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. I was at the Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of Mordor,wherewehadthemastery:forthe Spearof Gil-galad and the Sword of Elendil, Aeglos and Narsil, none could withstand.Ibeheldthelastcombatontheslopesof Orodruin, where Gil-galad died, and Elendil fell, and Narsil broke beneathhim;but Sauronhimselfwasoverthrown,and Isildur
the council of elrond 317 cut the Ring from his hand with the hilt-shard of his father’s sword, and took it for his own.’ At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. ‘So that is what became ofthe Ring!’ he cried.‘If ever sucha tale was toldin the South, it has long been forgotten. I have heard of the Great Ringofhimthatwedonotname;butwebelievedthat itperishedfromtheworldintheruinofhisfirstrealm.Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.’ ‘Alas! yes,’ said Elrond. ‘Isildur took it, as should not have been. It should have been cast then into Orodruin’s fire nigh athandwhereitwasmade.Butfewmarkedwhat Isildurdid. He alone stood by his father in that last mortal contest; and by Gil-galadonly C´ırdanstood, and I.But Isildurwould not listen to our counsel. ‘‘‘This I will have as weregild for my father, and my brother,’’ he said; and therefore whether we would or no, he took it to treasure it. But soon he was betrayed by it to his death; and so it is named in the North Isildur’s Bane. Yet death maybe was better than what else might have befallen him. ‘Only to the North did these tidings come, and only to a few. Small wonder is it that you have not heard them, Boromir.Fromtheruinofthe Gladden Fields,where Isildur perished,threemenonlycameeverbackoverthemountains after longwandering. Oneof these was Ohtar, theesquire of Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he brought them to Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being but achildhadremainedherein Rivendell.But Narsilwasbroken and its light extinguished, and it has not yet been forged again. ‘Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last Alliance? Not wholly so, yet it did not achieve its end. Sauron was dimin- ished, but not destroyed. His Ring was lost but not unmade. The Dark Tower was broken, but its foundations were not removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring, andwhileitremainstheywillendure.Many Elvesandmany mighty Men, and many of their friends, had perished in the
318 the fellowship of the ring war. Ana´rion was slain, and Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall there be any such league of Elves and Men; for Men multiply and the Firstborn decrease, and the two kindreds are estranged. And ever since that day the race of Nu´menor has decayed, and the span of their years has lessened. ‘Inthe Northafterthewarandtheslaughterofthe Gladden Fields the Men of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of Annu´minas beside Lake Evendim fell into ruin; and the heirs of Valandil removed and dwelt at Fornost on the high North Downs, and that now too is desolate. Men call it Deadmen’s Dike, and they fear to tread there. For the folk of Arnor dwindled, and their foes devoured them, and their lordship passed, leaving only green mounds in the grassy hills. ‘In the South the realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while its splendour grew, recalling somewhat of the might of Nu´menor, ere it fell. High towers that people built, and strong places, and havens of many ships; and the winged crown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by folk of many tongues. Their chief city was Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars, through the midst of which the River flowed. And Minas Ithil they built, Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward upon a shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow; and westward at the feet of the White Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower of the Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a white tree, from the seed of that tree which Isildur brought over the deep waters, and the seed of that tree before came from Eresse¨a, and before that out of the Uttermost West in the Day before days when the world was young. ‘But in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth the lineof Meneldilsonof Ana´rionfailed,andthe Treewithered, andthebloodofthe Nu´meno´reansbecamemingledwiththat of lesser men. Then the watch upon the walls of Mordor slept, and dark things crept back to Gorgoroth. And on a time evil things came forth, and they took Minas Ithil and abode in it, and they made it into a place of dread; and it is
the council of elrond 319 called Minas Morgul, the Tower of Sorcery. Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of Guard; andthesetwocitieswereeveratwar,but Osgiliathwhichlay between was deserted and in its ruins shadows walked. ‘So it has been for many lives of men. But the Lords of Minas Tirith still fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passageofthe Riverfrom Argonathtothe Sea.Andnowthat partofthetalethat Ishalltellisdrawntoitsclose.Forinthe days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of all knowledge, and the Three were released from its dominion. But now in this latter day they are in peril once more, for to our sorrow the Onehasbeenfound.Othersshallspeakofitsfinding,for in that I played small part.’ He ceased, but at once Boromir stood up, tall and proud, before them. ‘Give me leave, Master Elrond,’ said he, ‘first to say more of Gondor, for verily from the land of Gondor I am come. And it would be well for all to know what passes there. For few, I deem, know of our deeds, and therefore guess little at their peril, if we should fail at last. ‘Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of Nu´menor is spent, nor all its pride and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild folk of the East are still restrained, and the terror of Morgul kept at bay; and thus alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind us, bulwark of the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then? ‘Yet that hour, maybe, is not now far away. The Name- less Enemy has arisen again. Smoke rises once more from Orodruinthatwecall Mount Doom.Thepowerofthe Black Land grows and we are hard beset. When the Enemy re- turnedourfolkweredrivenfrom Ithilien,ourfairdomaineast ofthe River,thoughwekeptafootholdthereandstrengthof arms. But this very year, in the days of June, sudden war came upon us out of Mordor, and we were swept away. We were outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the Easterlings and the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by
320 the fellowship of the ring numbers that we were defeated. A power was there that we have not felt before. ‘Some said that it could be seen, like a great black horse- man, a dark shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a madness filled our foes, but fear fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnant of our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still stood amid the ruins of Osgiliath. ‘Iwasinthecompanythatheldthebridge,untilitwascast down behind us. Four only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself and two others. But still we fight on, holding all the west shores of Anduin; and those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much praise but little help. Only from Rohan now will any men ride to us when we call. ‘In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leagues to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyedallalone.But Idonotseekalliesinwar.Themight of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons, it is said. I come to askforcounselandtheunravellingofhardwords.Foronthe eve of the sudden assault a dream came to my brother in a troubled sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me. ‘In that dream I thought the eastern sky grew dark and there was a growing thunder, but in the West a pale light lingered, and out of it I heard a voice, remote but clear, crying: Seek for the Sword that was broken: In Imladris it dwells; There shall be counsels taken Stronger than Morgul-spells. There shall be shown a token That Doom is near at hand, For Isildur’s Bane shall waken, And the Halfling forth shall stand.
the council of elrond 321 Of these words we could understand little, and we spoke to our father, Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of Gondor. This only would he say, that Imladris was of old the name among the Elves of a far northern dale, where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt, greatest of lore-masters. There- fore my brother, seeing how desperate was our need, was eager to heed the dream and seek for Imladris; but since the way was full of doubt and danger, I took the journey upon myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long have I wandered by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond, of which many had heard, but few knew where it lay.’ ‘Andhereinthehouseof Elrondmoreshallbemadeclear to you,’ said Aragorn, standing up. He cast his sword upon the table that stood before Elrond, and the blade was in two pieces. ‘Here is the Sword that was Broken!’ he said. ‘And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas Tirith?’asked Boromir,lookinginwonderattheleanfaceof the Ranger and his weather-stained cloak. ‘He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,’ said Elrond; ‘and he is descended through many fathers from Isildur Elendil’s son of Minas Ithil.Heisthe Chiefofthe Du´nedaininthe North, and few are now left of that folk.’ ‘Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!’ cried Frodo in amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected the Ring to be demanded at once. ‘It does not belong to either of us,’ said Aragorn; ‘but it has been ordained that you should hold it for a while.’ ‘Bring out the Ring, Frodo!’ said Gandalf solemnly. ‘The timehascome.Holditup,andthen Boromirwillunderstand the remainder of his riddle.’ There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken by a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to reveal the Ring, and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and flickered as he held it up before them in his trembling hand.
322 the fellowship of the ring ‘Behold Isildur’s Bane!’ said Elrond. Boromir’s eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. ‘The Halfling!’hemuttered.‘Isthenthedoomof Minas Tirith comeatlast?Butwhythenshouldweseekabrokensword?’ ‘The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn.‘Butdoomandgreatdeedsareindeedathand.For the Swordthatwas Brokenisthe Swordof Elendilthatbroke beneath him when he fell. It has been treasured by his heirs when all other heirlooms were lost; for it was spoken of old among us that it should be made again when the Ring, Isildur’s Bane,wasfound.Nowyouhaveseentheswordthat you have sought, what would you ask? Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?’ ‘I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the meaningofariddle,’answered Boromirproudly.‘Yetweare hard pressed, and the Sword of Elendil would be a help beyondourhope–ifsuchathingcouldindeedreturnoutof the shadows of the past.’ He looked again at Aragorn, and doubt was in his eyes. Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he wasannoyedonhisfriend’sbehalf.Standingsuddenlyuphe burst out: All that is gold does not glitter, Not all those who wander are lost; The old that is strong does not wither, Deep roots are not reached by the frost. From the ashes a fire shall be woken, A light from the shadows shall spring; Renewed shall be blade that was broken: The crownless again shall be king. ‘Not very good perhaps, but to the point – if you need more beyond the word of Elrond. If that was worth a journey of a hundred and ten days to hear, you had best listen to it.’ He sat down with a snort. ‘I made that up myself,’ he whispered to Frodo, ‘for the
the council of elrond 323 Du´nadan, a long time ago when he first told me about him- self. I almost wish that my adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.’ Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. ‘For my part I forgive your doubt,’ he said. ‘Little do I resemble the figures of Elendil and Isildur as they stand carvenintheirmajestyinthehallsof Denethor.Iambutthe heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I have had a hard life and along;andtheleaguesthatliebetweenhereand Gondorare asmallpartinthecountofmyjourneys.Ihavecrossedmany mountains and many rivers, and trodden many plains, even intothe farcountries of Rhuˆnand Haradwherethe starsare strange. ‘But my home, such as I have, is in the North. For here the heirs of Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for many generations. Our days have darkened, and we have dwindled; but ever the Sword has passed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir, ere I end. Lonely men are we, Rangers of the wild, hunters – but hunters ever of the servants of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not in Mordor only. ‘If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have played another part. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and bright swords do not stay. You know little of the lands beyond your bounds. Peace and freedom, do you say? The North would have known them little but for us. Fear would have destroyed them. But when dark things come from the houseless hills, or creep from sunless woods, they fly from us. What roads would any dare to tread, what safetywouldtherebeinquietlands,orinthehomesofsimple men at night, if the Du´nedain were asleep, or were all gone into the grave? ‘Andyet lessthanks havewe thanyou. Travellersscowl at us, and countrymen give us scornful names. ‘‘Strider’’ I am to one fat man who lives within a day’s march of foes that wouldfreezehisheart,orlayhislittletowninruin,ifhewere not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would not have it otherwise.
324 the fellowship of the ring Ifsimplefolkarefreefromcareandfear,simpletheywillbe, and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred, while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown. ‘But now the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur’s Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword shall be reforged. I will come to Minas Tirith.’ ‘Isildur’s Bane is found, you say,’ said Boromir. ‘I have seenabrightringinthe Halfling’shand;but Isildurperished ere this age of the world began, they say. How do the Wise know that this ring is his? And how has it passed down the years, until it is brought hither by so strange a messenger?’ ‘That shall be told,’ said Elrond. ‘But not yet, I beg, Master!’ cried Bilbo. ‘Already the Sun is climbing to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.’ ‘I had not named you,’ said Elrond smiling. ‘But I do so now. Come! Tell us your tale. And if you have not yet cast your story into verse, you may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.’ ‘Verywell,’said Bilbo.‘Iwilldoasyoubid.But Iwillnow tell the true story, and if some here have heard me tell it otherwise’ – he looked sidelong at Glo´in – ‘I ask them to forget it and forgive me. I only wished to claim the treasure as my very own in those days, and to be rid of the name of thief that was put on me. But perhaps I understand things a little better now. Anyway, this is what happened.’ To some there Bilbo’s tale was wholly new, and they listenedwithamazementwhiletheoldhobbit,actuallynotat all displeased, recounted his adventure with Gollum, at full length. Hedid not omit asingle riddle. Hewould have given also an account of his party and disappearance from the Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand. ‘Well told, my friend,’ he said, ‘but that is enough at this time.Forthemomentitsufficestoknowthatthe Ringpassed to Frodo, your heir. Let him now speak!’
the council of elrond 325 Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his deal- ingswiththe Ringfromthedaythatitpassedintohiskeeping. Every step of his journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinenwasquestionedandconsidered,andeverythingthat he could recall concerning the Black Riders was examined. At last he sat down again. ‘Not bad,’ Bilbo said to him. ‘You would have made a goodstoryofit,iftheyhadn’tkeptoninterrupting.Itriedto make a few notes, but we shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am to write it up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!’ ‘Yes, it made quite a long tale,’ answered Frodo. ‘But the story still does not seem complete to me. Istill want to know a good deal, especially about Gandalf.’ Galdor of the Havens, who sat nearby, overheard him. ‘You speak for me also,’ he cried, and turning to Elrond he said: ‘The Wise may have good reason to believe that the halfling’s trove is indeed the Great Ring of long debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But maywenotheartheproofs?And Iwouldaskthisalso.What of Saruman? He is learned in the lore of the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel – if he knows the things that we have heard?’ ‘The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,’ said Elrond. ‘I had not overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it is the part of Gandalf to make clear; and I call upon him last, for it is the place of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief.’ ‘Some, Galdor,’ said Gandalf, ‘would think the tidings of Glo´in, and the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the halfling’s trove is a thing of great worth to the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the Nazguˆl keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed.’ At this Glo´in stirred, but did not speak.‘The Threeweknowof.Whatthenisthisonethathe desires so much? ‘There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River
326 the fellowship of the ring and the Mountain, between the loss and the finding. But the gap in the knowledge of the Wise has been filled at last. Yet tooslowly.Forthe Enemyhasbeenclosebehind,closereven than I feared. And well is it that not until this year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth. ‘Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to pass the doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur, andsecretlyexploredhisways,andfoundthusthatourfears were true: he was none other than Sauron, our Enemy of old, at length taking shape and power again. Some, too, will remember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds against him, and for long we watched him only. Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, and the Council put forth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood – and thatwasintheveryyearofthefindingofthis Ring:astrange chance, if chance it was. ‘But we were too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron also had watched us, and had long prepared against our stroke, gov- erning Mordor from afar through Minas Morgul, where his Nine servants dwelt, until all was ready. Then he gave way before us, but only feigned to flee, and soon after came to the Dark Tower and openly declared himself. Then for the last time the Council met; for now we learned that he was seeking ever more eagerly for the One. We feared then that hehadsomenewsofitthatweknewnothingof.But Saruman said nay, and repeated what he had said to us before: that the One would never again be found in Middle-earth. ‘‘‘At the worst,’’ said he, ‘‘our Enemy knows that we have it not, and that it still is lost. But what was lost may yet be found, he thinks. Fear not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago, while Sauron slept, it was rolled down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End.’’’ Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long lain hidden. He sighed.
the council of elrond 327 ‘There I was at fault,’ he said. ‘I was lulled by the words of Saruman the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner, and our peril would now be less.’ ‘We were all at fault,’ said Elrond, ‘and but for your vigil- ance the Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!’ ‘From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I desired to know how this thingcameto Gollum,andhowlonghehadpossessedit.So I set a watch for him, guessing that he would ere long come forthfromhisdarknesstoseekforhistreasure.Hecame,but heescapedandwasnotfound.Andthenalas!Iletthematter rest, watching and waiting only, as we have too often done. ‘Timepassedwithmanycares,untilmydoubtswereawak- ened again to sudden fear. Whence came the hobbit’s ring? What, if my fear was true, should be done with it? Those things I must decide. But I spoke yet of my dread to none, knowing the peril of an untimely whisper, if it went astray. In all the long wars with the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest foe. ‘That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware that spies of many sorts, even beasts and birds, were gathered round the Shire, and my fear grew. I called for the help of the Du´nedain, and their watch was doubled; and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.’ ‘And I,’ said Aragorn, ‘counselled that we should hunt for Gollum,toolatethoughitmayseem.Andsinceitseemedfit that Isildur’s heir should labour to repair Isildur’s fault, I went with Gandalf on the long and hopeless search.’ Then Gandalftoldhowtheyhadexploredthewholelength of Wilderland, down even to the Mountains of Shadow and thefencesof Mordor.‘Therewehadrumourofhim,andwe guess that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but we never found him, and at last I despaired. And then in my despair I thoughtagainofatestthatmightmakethefindingof Gollum unneeded. The ring itself might tell if it were the One. The memory of words at the Council came back to me: words of
328 the fellowship of the ring Saruman, half-heeded at the time. I heard them now clearly in my heart. ‘‘‘The Nine,the Seven,andthe Three,’’hesaid,‘‘hadeach their proper gem. Not so the One. It was round and unadorned,asitwereoneofthelesserrings;butitsmakerset marksuponitthattheskilled,maybe,couldstillseeandread.’’ ‘What those marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The maker. And Saruman? But great though his lore maybe,itmusthaveasource.Whathandsave Sauron’sever held this thing, ere it was lost? The hand of Isildur alone. ‘Withthatthought,Iforsook thechase,andpassedswiftly to Gondor. In former days the members of my order had been well received there, but Saruman most of all. Often he had been for long the guest of the Lords of the City. Less welcome did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, andgrudginglyhepermittedmetosearchamonghishoarded scrolls and books. ‘‘‘Ifindeedyoulookonly,asyousay,forrecordsofancient days,andthebeginningsofthe City,readon!’’hesaid.‘‘For to me what was is less dark than what is to come, and that is my care. But unless you have more skill even than Saruman, who has studied here long, you will find naught that is not well known to me, who am master of the lore of this City.’’ ‘So said Denethor. And yet there lie in his hoards many records that few even of the lore-masters now can read, for theirscriptsandtongueshavebecomedarktolatermen.And Boromir, there lies in Minas Tirith still, unread, I guess, by any save Saruman and myself since the kings failed, a scroll that Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not march away straight from the war in Mordor, as some have told the tale.’ ‘Some in the North, maybe,’ Boromir broke in. ‘All know in Gondor that he went first to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his nephew Meneldil, instructing him, before he committed to him the rule of the South Kingdom. In that time he planted there the last sapling of the White Tree in memory of his brother.’ ‘But in that time also he made this scroll,’ said Gandalf;
the council of elrond 329 ‘and that is not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns the Ring, and thus wrote Isildur therein: The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but records of it shall be left in Gondor, wherealsodwelltheheirsof Elendil,lestatimecomewhen the memory of these great matters shall grow dim. ‘Andafterthesewords Isildurdescribedthe Ring,suchashe found it. It was hot when I first took it, hot as a glede, and my hand was scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of thepain of it. Yet even as I write it is cooled, andit seemethtoshrink,thoughitlosethneitheritsbeautynorits shape. Already the writing upon it, which at first was as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now only barely to be read. It is fashioned in an elven-script of Eregion, for they have no letters in Mordor for such subtle work; but the languageis unknownto me.I deemitto bea tongueof the Black Land,sinceitisfoulanduncouth.Whatevilitsaith I do not know; but I trace here a copy of it, lest it fade beyond recall. The Ring misseth, maybe, the heat of Sauron’s hand, which was black and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. But for mypart Iwillrisknohurttothisthing:ofalltheworksof Sauron the only fair. It is precious to me, though I buy it with great pain. ‘When I read these words, my quest was ended. For the traced writing was indeed as Isildur guessed, in the tongue of Mordorandtheservantsofthe Tower.Andwhatwassaid therein was already known. For in the day that Sauron first putonthe One,Celebrimbor,makerofthe Three,wasaware of him, and from afar he heard him speak these words, and so his evil purposes were revealed.
330 the fellowship of the ring ‘At once I took my leave of Denethor, but even as I went northwards,messagescametomeoutof Lo´rienthat Aragorn had passed that way, and that he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went first to meet him and hear his tale. Into what deadly perils he had gone alone I dared not guess.’ ‘Thereislittleneedtotellofthem,’said Aragorn.‘Ifaman must needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly flowers of Morgul Vale, then perils he will have. I, too, despaired at last, and I began my homeward journey. Andthen,byfortune,Icamesuddenlyonwhat Isought:the marksofsoftfeetbesideamuddypool.Butnowthetrailwas freshandswift,anditlednotto Mordorbutaway.Alongthe skirtsofthe Dead Marshes Ifollowedit,andthen Ihadhim. Lurking by a stagnant mere, peering in the water as the dark eve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was covered with green slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and I was notgentle.Nothingmoredid Ievergetfromhismouththan the marks of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of all my journey, the road back, watching him day and night, making him walk before me with a halter on his neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever towards Mirkwood.Ibroughthimthereatlastandgavehim tothe Elves,forwehadagreedthatthisshouldbedone;and I was glad to be rid of his company, for he stank. For my part I hopenever tolookupon himagain;but Gandalfcame and endured long speech with him.’ ‘Yes, long and weary,’ said Gandalf, ‘but not without profit. For one thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now told openly for the first time; but that mattered little, since I had already guessed it. But I learned then first that Gollum’s ring came out of the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also that he had possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring had lengthened his years far beyond their span; but that power only the Great Rings wield. ‘Andifthatisnotproofenough,Galdor,thereistheother
the council of elrond 331 testthat Ispokeof.Uponthisveryringwhichyouhavehere seen held aloft, round and unadorned, the letters that Isildur reported may still be read, if one has the strength of will to setthegoldenthinginthefireawhile.That Ihavedone,and this I have read: Ash nazg durbatuluˆk, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatuluˆk agh burzum-ishi krimpatul.’ The change in the wizard’s voice was astounding. Sud- denly it became menacing, powerful, harsh as stone. A shadow seemed to pass over the high sun, and the porch for a moment grew dark. All trembled, and the Elves stopped their ears. ‘Never before has any voice dared to utter words of that tongue in Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,’ said Elrond, as the shadow passed and the company breathed once more. ‘And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon, Master Elrond. For if that tongue is not soon to be heard in everycornerofthe West,thenletallputdoubtasidethatthis thing is indeed what the Wise have declared: the treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice; and in it lies a great part of his strength of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that the Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been betrayed: One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring to bring them all and in the Darkness bind them. ‘Know also, my friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum. He was loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it is beyond all doubt that he went to Mordor, and there all that he knew was forced from him. Thus the Enemy knows now that the One is found, that it was long in the Shire; and sincehisservantshavepursueditalmosttoourdoor,hesoon
332 the fellowship of the ring will know, already he may know, even as I speak, that we have it here.’ Allsatsilentforawhile,untilatlength Boromirspoke.‘He is a small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became of him? To what doom did you put him?’ ‘He is in prison, but no worse,’ said Aragorn. ‘He had suffered much. There is no doubt that he was tormented, and the fear of Sauron lies black on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful Elves of Mirkwood.Hismaliceisgreatandgiveshimastrengthhardly to be believed in one so lean and withered. He could work much mischief still, if he were free. And I do not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil errand.’ ‘Alas! alas!’ cried Legolas, and in his fair Elvish face there was great distress. ‘The tidings that I was sent to bring must nowbetold.Theyarenotgood,butonlyherehave Ilearned how evil they may seem to this company. Sme´agol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.’ ‘Escaped?’ cried Aragorn. ‘That is ill news indeed. We shallallrueitbitterly,Ifear.Howcamethefolkof Thranduil to fail in their trust?’ ‘Notthroughlackofwatchfulness,’said Legolas;‘butper- haps through over-kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others, and that more is known of our doings thanwecouldwish.Weguardedthiscreaturedayandnight, at Gandalf’s bidding, much though we wearied of the task. But Gandalf bade us hope still for his cure, and we had not the heart to keep him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall back into his old black thoughts.’ ‘Youwerelesstendertome,’said Glo´inwithaflashofhis eyes, as old memories were stirred of his imprisonment in the deep places of the Elven-king’s halls. ‘Now come!’ said Gandalf. ‘Pray, do not interrupt, my good Glo´in. That was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the grievances that stand between Elves and
the council of elrond 333 Dwarvesaretobebroughtuphere,wemayaswellabandon this Council.’ Glo´inroseandbowed,and Legolascontinued.‘Inthedays of fair weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree standing alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount up to the highest branches, until he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at the tree’s foot. One day he refused to come down, and the guards had no mind to climb after him: he had learned the trick of clinging to boughs with his feet as well as with his hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night. ‘It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and star- less, that Orcs came on us at unawares. We drove them off after some time; they were many and fierce, but they came from over the mountains, and were unused to the woods. When the battle was over, we found that Gollum was gone, andhisguardswereslainortaken.Itthenseemedplaintous thattheattackhadbeenmadeforhisrescue,andthatheknew ofitbeforehand.Howthatwascontrivedwecannotguess;but Gollumiscunning,andthespiesofthe Enemyaremany.The darkthingsthatweredrivenoutintheyearofthe Dragon’sfall havereturnedingreaternumbers,and Mirkwoodisagainan evil place, save where our realm is maintained. ‘Wehavefailedtorecapture Gollum.Wecameonhistrail among those of many Orcs, and it plunged deep into the Forest,going south.But erelong itescapedour skill,and we darednotcontinuethehunt;forweweredrawingnighto Dol Guldur,andthatisstillaveryevilplace;wedonotgothatway.’ ‘Well, well, he is gone,’ said Gandalf. ‘We have no time to seek for him again. He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet that neither he nor Sauron have foreseen. ‘And now I will answer Galdor’s other questions. What of Saruman?Whatarehiscounselstousinthisneed?Thistale I must tell in full, for only Elrond has heard it yet, and that in brief; but it will bear on all that we must resolve. It is the last chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it has yet gone. * * *
334 the fellowship of the ring ‘Attheendof June Iwasinthe Shire,butacloudofanxiety was on my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the littleland;for Ihadaforebodingofsomedanger,stillhidden from me but drawing near. There messages reached me tell- ing me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard of the Black Shadowachillsmotemyheart.But Ifoundnothing save a few fugitives from the South; yet it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of which they would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along the Greenway; and not far from Bree I came upon a traveller sitting on a bank beside the road with his grazing horse beside him. It was Radagast the Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel, near the borders of Mirkwood. He is one of my order, but I had not seen him for many a year. ‘‘‘Gandalf!’’ he cried. ‘‘I was seeking you. But I am a stranger in these parts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region with the uncouth name of Shire.’’ ‘‘‘Your information was correct,’’ I said. ‘‘But do not put it that way, if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the borders of the Shire now. And what do you want with me? It must be pressing. You were never a traveller, unless driven by great need.’’ ‘‘‘I have an urgent errand,’’ he said. ‘‘My news is evil.’’ Then he looked about him, as if the hedges might have ears. ‘‘Nazguˆl,’’he whispered.‘‘The Nineareabroad again.They have crossed the River secretly and are moving westward. They have taken the guise of riders in black.’’ ‘I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it. ‘‘‘The Enemy must have some great need or purpose,’’ said Radagast; ‘‘but what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannot guess.’’ ‘‘‘What do you mean?’’ said I. ‘‘‘Ihavebeentoldthatwherevertheygothe Ridersaskfor news of a land called Shire.’’ ‘‘‘The Shire,’’Isaid;butmyheartsank.Foreventhe Wise might fear to withstand the Nine, when they are gathered together under their fell chieftain. A great king and sorcerer
the council of elrond 335 he was of old, and now he wields a deadly fear. ‘‘Who told you, and who sent you?’’ I asked. ‘‘‘Saruman the White,’’ answered Radagast. ‘‘And he told metosaythatifyoufeeltheneed,hewillhelp;butyoumust seek his aid at once, or it will be too late.’’ ‘And that message brought me hope. For Saruman the White is the greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a worthy Wizard, a master of shapes and changes of hue; and hehasmuchloreofherbsandbeasts,andbirdsareespecially his friends. But Saruman has long studied the arts of the Enemyhimself,andthuswehaveoftenbeenabletoforestall him.Itwasbythedevicesof Sarumanthatwedrovehimfrom Dol Guldur.Itmightbethathehadfoundsomeweaponsthat would drive back the Nine. ‘‘‘I will go to Saruman,’’ I said. ‘‘‘Then you must go now,’’ said Radagast; ‘‘for I have wasted time in looking for you, and the days are running short. I was told to find you before Midsummer, and that is now here. Even if you set out from this spot, you will hardly reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. I myself shall turn back at once.’’ And with that he mounted and would have ridden straight off. ‘‘‘Stay a moment!’’ I said. ‘‘We shall need your help, and the help of all things that will give it. Send out messages to all the beasts and birds that are your friends. Tell them to bring news of anything that bears on this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc.’’ ‘‘‘I will do that,’’ he said, and rode off as if the Nine were after him. ‘I could not follow him then and there. I had ridden very far already that day, and I was as weary as my horse; and I needed to consider matters. I stayed the night in Bree, and decided that I had no time to return to the Shire. Never did I make a greater mistake! ‘However, I wrote a message to Frodo, and trusted to my friend the innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn;
336 the fellowship of the ring and I came at long last to the dwelling of Saruman. That is farsouthin Isengard,intheendofthe Misty Mountains,not far from the Gap of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you that thatisagreatopenvalethatliesbetweenthe Misty Mountains and the northmost foothills of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountainsofhishome.But Isengardisacircleofsheerrocks that enclose a valley as with a wall, and in the midst of that valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was not made by Saruman, but by the Men of Nu´menor long ago; and it is very tall and has many secrets; yet it looks not to be a work of craft. It cannot be reached save by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is only one gate. ‘Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch in thewallofrock;anditwasstronglyguarded.Butthekeepers of the gate were on the watch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me. I rode under the arch, and the gate closed silently behindme, and suddenly Iwas afraid, though I knew no reason for it. ‘But Irodetothefootof Orthanc,andcametothestairof Saruman; and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber. He wore a ring on his finger. ‘‘‘Soyouhavecome,Gandalf,’’hesaidtomegravely;but in his eyes there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart. ‘‘‘Yes, I have come,’’ I said. ‘‘I have come for your aid, Saruman the White.’’ And that title seemed to anger him. ‘‘‘Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey!’’ he scoffed. ‘‘For aid?Ithasseldombeenheardofthat Gandalfthe Greysought for aid, one so cunning and so wise, wandering about the lands, and concerning himself in every business, whether it belongs to him or not.’’ ‘Ilookedathimandwondered.‘‘Butif Iamnotdeceived,’’ said I, ‘‘things are now moving which will require the union of all our strength.’’ ‘‘‘That may be so,’’ he said, ‘‘but the thought is late in coming to you. How long, I wonder, have you concealed fromme,theheadofthe Council,amatterofgreatestimport?
the council of elrond 337 Whatbringsyounowfromyourlurking-placeinthe Shire?’’ ‘‘‘The Nine have come forth again,’’ I answered. ‘‘They have crossed the River. So Radagast said to me.’’ ‘‘‘Radagast the Brown!’’ laughed Saruman, and he no longerconcealedhisscorn.‘‘Radagastthe Bird-tamer!Rada- gast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! Yet he had just the wit to play the part that I set him. For you have come, and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay, Gandalfthe Grey,andrestfromjourneys.For Iam Saruman the Wise,Saruman Ring-maker,Sarumanof Many Colours!’’ ‘I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white, were not so, but were woven of all colours, and if he movedtheyshimmeredandchangedhuesothattheeyewas bewildered. ‘‘‘I liked white better,’’ I said. ‘‘‘White!’’ he sneered. ‘‘It serves as a beginning. White cloth may be dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can be broken.’’ ‘‘‘Inwhichcaseitisnolongerwhite,’’said I.‘‘Andhethat breaks a thing to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom.’’ ‘‘‘Youneednotspeaktomeastooneofthefoolsthatyou take for friends,’’ said he. ‘‘I have not brought you hither to be instructed by you, but to give you a choice.’’ ‘He drew himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were making a speech long rehearsed. ‘‘The Elder Days are gone. The Middle Days are passing. The Younger Days are beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but our time is at hand: the world of Men, which we must rule. But we must havepower,powertoorderallthingsaswewill,forthatgood which only the Wise can see. ‘‘‘Andlisten,Gandalf,myoldfriendandhelper!’’hesaid, coming near and speaking now in a softer voice. ‘‘I said we, for we it may be, if you will join with me. A new Power is rising.Againstittheoldalliesandpolicieswillnotavailusat all. There is no hope left in Elves or dying Nu´menor. This then is one choice before you, before us. We may join with
338 the fellowship of the ring that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward for those that aided it. As the Power grows, its proved friends will also grow; and the Wise, such as you and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses, to control it. We can bide our time, we can keep our thoughts in our hearts, deploring maybe evils done by the way, but approving the high and ultimate purpose: Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the things that we have so far striven in vain to accomplish, hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends. There need not be, there would not be, any real change in our designs, only in our means.’’ ‘‘‘Saruman,’’ I said, ‘‘I have heard speeches of this kind before, but only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears.’’ ‘Helookedatmesidelong,andpausedawhileconsidering. ‘‘Well, I see that this wise course does not commend itself to you,’’ he said. ‘‘Not yet? Not if some better way can be contrived?’’ ‘He came and laid his long hand on my arm. ‘‘And why not, Gandalf?’’ he whispered. ‘‘Why not? The Ruling Ring? Ifwecouldcommandthat,thenthe Powerwouldpasstous. That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have many eyes in my service, and I believe that you know where this precious thingnow lies.Is itnot so?Or whydo the Nineask for the Shire, and what is your business there?’’ As he said this a lust which he could not conceal shone suddenly in his eyes. ‘‘‘Saruman,’’ I said, standing away from him, ‘‘only one hand at a time can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we! But I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now that I learn your mind.Youwereheadofthe Council,butyouhaveunmasked yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to submit to Sauron,ortoyourself.Iwilltakeneither.Haveyouothersto offer?’’
the council of elrond 339 ‘He was cold now and perilous. ‘‘Yes,’’ he said. ‘‘I did not expect you to show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the chance of aiding me willingly, and so saving yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is to stay here, until the end.’’ ‘‘‘Until what end?’’ ‘‘‘Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I mayfindmeansto persuadeyou.Oruntilitis foundinyour despite, and the Ruler has time to turn to lighter matters: to devise, say, a fitting reward for the hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey.’’ ‘‘‘That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,’’ said I. He laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it. ‘They took me and they set me alone on the pinnacle of Orthanc, in the place where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars. There is no descent save by a narrow stair ofmanythousandsteps,andthevalleybelowseemsfaraway. I looked on it and saw that, whereas it had once been green and fair, it was now filled with pits and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in Isengard, for Saruman was mustering a great force on his own account, in rivalry of Sauron and not in his service, yet. Over all his works a dark smoke hung and wrapped itself about the sides of Orthanc. I stood alone on an island in the clouds; and I had no chance of escape, and my days were bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I had but little room in which to pace to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North. ‘Thatthe Ninehadindeedarisen Ifeltassured,apartfrom the words of Saruman which might be lies. Long ere I came to Isengard I had heard tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for my friends in the Shire; but still I had some hope. I hoped that Frodo had set forthatonce,asmyletterhadurged,andthathehadreached Rivendellbeforethedeadlypursuitbegan.Andbothmyfear and my hope proved ill-founded. For my hope was founded
340 the fellowship of the ring on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was founded on the cunningof Sauron.But fatmenwho sellalehave manycalls to answer; and the power of Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to think that the hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter in the Shire far away.’ ‘I saw you!’ cried Frodo. ‘You were walking backwards and forwards. The moon shone in your hair.’ Gandalfpausedastonishedandlookedathim.‘Itwasonly a dream,’ said Frodo, ‘but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite forgotten it. It came some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.’ ‘Thenitwaslateincoming,’said Gandalf,‘asyouwillsee. I was in an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom been in such need, and do not bear such misfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught like a fly in a spi- der’s treacherous web! Yet even the most subtle spiders may leave a weak thread. ‘Atfirst Ifeared,as Sarumannodoubtintended,that Rada- gast had also fallen. Yet I had caught no hint of anything wrong in his voice or in his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone to Isengard, or I should have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed his mind and deceived his messenger. It would have been useless in any case to try and win over the honest Radagast to treachery. He sought me in good faith, and so persuaded me. ‘That was the undoing of Saruman’s plot. For Radagast knewnoreasonwhyheshouldnotdoas Iasked;andherode away towards Mirkwood where he had many friends of old. Andthe Eaglesofthe Mountainswentfarandwide,andthey saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Orcs; and the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the lands; and they heard news of the escape of Gollum. And they sent a messenger to bring these tidings to me. ‘So it was that when summer waned, there came a night of moon, and Gwaihir the Windlord, swiftest of the Great
the council of elrond 341 Eagles, came unlooked-for to Orthanc; and he found me standing on the pinnacle. Then I spoke to him and he bore meaway,before Sarumanwasaware.Iwasfarfrom Isengard, ere the wolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me. ‘‘‘How far can you bear me?’’ I said to Gwaihir. ‘‘‘Many leagues,’’ said he, ‘‘but not to the ends of the earth. I was sent to bear tidings not burdens.’’ ‘‘‘Then I must have a steed on land,’’ I said, ‘‘and a steed surpassingly swift, for I have never had such need of haste before.’’ ‘‘‘Then Iwillbearyouto Edoras,wherethe Lordof Rohan sits in his halls,’’ he said; ‘‘for that is not very far off.’’ And I was glad, for in the Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords,dwell,andtherearenohorseslikethosethatare bredinthatgreatvalebetweenthe Misty Mountainsandthe White. ‘‘‘Arethe Menof Rohanstilltobetrusted,doyouthink?’’ Isaidto Gwaihir,forthetreasonof Sarumanhadshakenmy faith. ‘‘‘They pay a tribute of horses,’’ he answered, ‘‘and send many yearly to Mordor, or so it is said; but they are not yet under the yoke. But if Saruman has become evil, as you say, then their doom cannot be long delayed.’’ ‘He set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn; and now I have lengthened my tale over long. The rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found evil already at work: the lies of Saruman; and the king of the land would not listen to my warnings.Hebademetakeahorseandbegone;and Ichose one much to my liking, but little to his. I took the best horse in his land, and I have never seen the like of him.’ ‘Thenhemustbeanoblebeastindeed,’said Aragorn;‘and it grieves me more than many tidings that might seem worse to learn that Sauron levies such tribute. It was not so when last I was in that land.’ ‘Nor is it now, I will swear,’ said Boromir. ‘It is a lie that comes from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan, true and
342 the fellowship of the ring valiant,ourallies,dwellingstillinthelandsthatwegavethem long ago.’ ‘The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,’ answered Aragorn. ‘Saruman has fallen under it. Rohan is beset. Who knows what you will find there, if ever you return?’ ‘Not this at least,’ said Boromir, ‘that they will buy their lives with horses. They love their horses next to their kin. And not without reason, for the horses of the Riddermark comefromthefieldsofthe North,farfromthe Shadow,and theirrace,asthatoftheirmasters,isdescendedfromthefree days of old.’ ‘Trueindeed!’said Gandalf.‘Andthereisoneamongthem thatmighthavebeenfoaledinthemorningoftheworld.The horses of the Nine cannot vie with him; tireless, swift as the flowing wind. Shadowfax they called him. By day his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade, and he passes unseen. Light is his footfall! Never before had any man mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and so speedilyheboremethat Ireachedthe Shirewhen Frodowas on the Barrow-downs, though I set out from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton. ‘But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heardtidingsofthe Riders,andthough Igainedonthemday by day, they were ever before me. They had divided their forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern borders, not farfromthe Greenway,andsomeinvadedthe Shirefromthe south. I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone; but I had words with old Gamgee. Many words and few to the point. He had much to say about the shortcomings of the new owners of Bag End. ‘‘‘I can’t abide changes,’’ said he, ‘‘not at my time of life, and least of all changes for the worst.’’ ‘‘Changes for the worst,’’ he repeated many times. ‘‘‘Worstisabadword,’’Isaidtohim,‘‘and Ihopeyoudo not live to see it.’’ But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton less than a week before, and that a blackhorsemanhadcometothe Hillthesameevening.Then
the council of elrond 343 Irodeoninfear.Icameto Bucklandandfounditinuproar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I came to the house at Crickhollow, and it was broken open and empty; but on the threshold there lay a cloak that had been Frodo’s. Then for a while hope left me, and I did not wait to gather news, or I might have been comforted; but I rode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it went many ways, and I was at a loss. But it seemed to me thatoneortwohadriddentowards Bree;andthatway Iwent, for I thought of words that might be said to the innkeeper. ‘‘‘Butterbur they call him,’’ thought I. ‘‘If this delay was his fault, I will melt all the butter in him. I will roast the old fool over a slow fire.’’ He expected no less, and when he saw my face he fell down flat and began to melt on the spot.’ ‘What did you do to him?’ cried Frodo in alarm. ‘He was really very kind to us and did all that he could.’ Gandalflaughed.‘Don’tbeafraid!’hesaid.‘Ididnotbite, and I barked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of him, when he stopped quaking, that I embraced the old fellow. How it had happened I could not then guess, but Ilearnedthatyouhadbeenin Breethenightbefore,and had gone off that morning with Strider. ‘‘‘Strider!’’ I cried, shouting for joy. ‘‘‘Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir,’’ said Butterbur, mistaking me. ‘‘He got at them, in spite of all that I could do, and they tookupwithhim.Theybehavedveryqueerallthetimethey were here: wilful, you might say.’’ ‘‘‘Ass!Fool!Thriceworthyandbeloved Barliman!’’said I. ‘‘It’s the best news I have had since Midsummer; it’s worth a gold piece at the least. May your beer be laid under an enchantment of surpassing excellence for seven years!’’ said I.‘‘Now Icantakeanight’srest,thefirstsince Ihaveforgot- ten when.’’ ‘So I stayed there that night, wondering much what had becomeofthe Riders;foronlyoftwohadthereyetbeenany
344 the fellowship of the ring news in Bree, it seemed. But in the night we heard more. Five at least came from the west, and they threw down the gates and passed through Bree like a howling wind; and the Bree-folk are still shivering and expecting the end of the world. I got up before dawn and went after them. ‘I do not know, but it seems clear to me that this is what happened. Their Captain remained in secret away south of Bree, while two rode ahead through the village, and four more invaded the Shire. But when these were foiled in Bree and at Crickhollow, they returned to their Captain with tid- ings, and so left the Road unguarded for a while, except by their spies. The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he himself with the rest rode along the Road in great wrath. ‘Igallopedto Weathertoplikeagale,and Ireacheditbefore sundownonmyseconddayfrom Bree–andtheywerethere beforeme.Theydrewawayfromme,fortheyfeltthecoming of my anger and they dared not face it while the Sun was in the sky. But they closed round at night, and I was besieged on the hill-top, in the old ring of Amon Suˆl. I was hard put to it indeed: such light and flame cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the war-beacons of old. ‘At sunrise I escaped and fled towards the north. I could not hope to do more. It was impossible to find you, Frodo, in the wilderness, and it would have been folly to try with all the Nine at my heels. So I had to trust to Aragorn. But I hoped to draw some of them off, and yet reach Rivendell ahead of you and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me, but they turned back after a while and made for the Ford, it seems. That helped a little, for there were only five, not nine, when your camp was attacked. ‘Ireachedhereatlastbyalonghardroad,upthe Hoarwell and through the Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It took me nearly fifteen days from Weathertop, for I could not ride among the rocks of the troll-fells, and Shadowfax departed.Isenthimbacktohismaster;butagreatfriendship hasgrownbetweenus,andif Ihaveneedhewillcomeatmy
the council of elrond 345 call. But so it was that I came to Rivendell only two days before the Ring, and news of its peril had already been brought here – which proved well indeed. ‘And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond and the others forgive the length of it. But such a thing has not happened before, that Gandalf broke tryst and did not come when he promised. An account to the Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required, I think. ‘Well, the Tale is now told, from first to last. Here we all are, and here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any nearer to our purpose. What shall we do with it?’ There was a silence. At last Elrond spoke again. ‘This is grievous news concerning Saruman,’ he said; ‘for wetrustedhimandheisdeepinallourcounsels.Itisperilous tostudytoodeeplytheartsofthe Enemy,forgoodorforill. But such falls and betrayals, alas, have happened before. Of the tales that we have heard this day the tale of Frodo was most strange to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo here; and it seems to me that he is perhaps not so alone and singularas Ihadthoughthim.Theworldhaschangedmuch since I last was on the westward roads. ‘The Barrow-wights we know by many names; and of the Old Forest many tales have been told: all that now remains is but an outlier of its northern march. Time was when a squirrelcouldgofromtreetotreefromwhatisnowthe Shire to Dunlandwestof Isengard.Inthoselands Ijourneyedonce, andmanythingswildandstrange Iknew.But Ihadforgotten Bombadil, if indeed this is still the same that walked the woods and hills long ago, and even then was older than the old.Thatwasnotthenhisname.Iarwain Ben-adarwecalled him, oldest and fatherless. But many another name he has since been given by other folk: Forn by the Dwarves, Orald by Northern Men, and other names beside. He is a strange creature, but maybe I should have summoned him to our Council.’ ‘He would not have come,’ said Gandalf.
346 the fellowship of the ring ‘Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his help?’asked Erestor.‘Itseemsthathehasapowerevenover the Ring.’ ‘No, I should not put it so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Say rather that the Ring has no power over him. He is his own master. But hecannotalterthe Ringitself,norbreakitspoweroverothers. And now he is withdrawn into a little land, within bounds that he has set, though none can see them, waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not step beyond them.’ ‘But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,’ said Erestor. ‘Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?’ ‘No,’said Gandalf,‘notwillingly.Hemightdoso,ifallthe free folk of the world begged him, but he would not under- standtheneed.Andifheweregiventhe Ring,hewouldsoon forget it, or most likely throw it away. Such things have no hold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe guardian; and that alone is answer enough.’ ‘Butinanycase,’said Glorfindel,‘tosendthe Ringtohim would only postpone the day of evil. He is far away. We could not now take it back to him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy. And even if we could, soon or late the Lord of the Rings would learn of its hiding place and would bend all his power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not. I think that in the end, if all else is con- quered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and then Night will come.’ ‘I know little of Iarwain save the name,’ said Galdor; ‘but Glorfindel, I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless such power is in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron can torture and destroy the very hills. What power still remains lies with us, here in Imladris, or with C´ırdan at the Havens, or in Lo´rien. But have they the strength, have we here the strength to withstand the Enemy, thecomingof Sauronatthelast,whenallelseisoverthrown?’ ‘I have not the strength,’ said Elrond; ‘neither have they.’ ‘Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by
the council of elrond 347 strength,’ said Glorfindel, ‘two things only remain for us to attempt: to send it over the Sea, or to destroy it.’ ‘But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any craft that we here possess,’ said Elrond. ‘And they who dwell beyond the Sea would not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who still dwell here to deal with it.’ ‘Then,’ said Glorfindel, ‘let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that even at the Council his feet were already on a crooked path.Heknewthatthe Ringwasnotlostforever,butwished us to think so; for he began to lust for it for himself. Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.’ ‘Not safe for ever,’ said Gandalf. ‘There are many things inthedeepwaters;andseasandlandsmaychange.Anditis not our part here to take thought only for a season, or for a fewlivesof Men,orforapassingageoftheworld.Weshould seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not hope to make one.’ ‘And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea,’ said Galdor. ‘If the return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous, then flight to the Sea is now fraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron will expect us to take the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The Nine have been unhorsed indeed, but that is but a respite, ere they find new steeds and swifter. Only the waning might of Gondor stands now between him and a march in power along the coasts into the North; and if he comes, assailing the White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves may have no escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle- earth.’ ‘Long yet will that march be delayed,’ said Boromir. ‘Gondor wanes, you say. But Gondor stands, and even the end of its strength is still very strong.’ ‘And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,’ said Galdor.‘Andotherroadshemayfindthat Gondordoes not guard.’
348 the fellowship of the ring ‘Then,’ said Erestor, ‘there are but two courses, as Glor- findel already has declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to unmake it. But both are beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?’ ‘None here can do so,’ said Elrond gravely. ‘At least none can foretell what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now clear which is the road that we must take. The westward road seems easiest. Therefore it must be shunned. It will be watched. Too often the Elves havefledthatway.Nowatthislastwemusttakeahardroad, aroadunforeseen.Thereliesourhope,ifhopeitbe.Towalk into peril – to Mordor. We must send the Ring to the Fire.’ Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house, looking out upon a sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness in his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo lookedathim.Hewasfingeringhisgreathornandfrowning. At length he spoke. ‘Idonotunderstandallthis,’hesaid.‘Sarumanisatraitor, butdidhenothaveaglimpseofwisdom?Whydoyouspeak everofhidinganddestroying?Whyshouldwenotthinkthat the Great Ring has come into our hands to serve us in the very hour of need? Wielding it the Free Lords of the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, I deem. ‘The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never sub- mit; but they may be beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a weapon. Let the Ring be your weapon, if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth to victory!’ ‘Alas, no,’ said Elrond. ‘We cannot use the Ruling Ring. That we now know too well. It belongs to Sauron and was made by him alone, and is altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone to wield at will, save only those who have already a great power of their own. But for them it holds an even deadlier peril. The very desire of it corrupts the heart. Consider Saruman. If any of the Wise
the council of elrond 349 should with this Ring overthrow the Lord of Mordor, using his own arts, he would then set himself on Sauron’s throne, andyetanother Dark Lordwouldappear.Andthatisanother reason why the Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in theworlditwillbeadangereventothe Wise.Fornothingis evil in the beginning. Even Sauron was not so. I fear to take the Ring to hide it. I will not take the Ring to wield it.’ ‘Nor I,’ said Gandalf. Boromirlookedatthemdoubtfully,buthebowedhishead. ‘So be it,’ he said. ‘Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as we have. And at the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap the Sword-that- was-Broken may still stem the tide – if the hand that wields it has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.’ ‘Whocan tell?’said Aragorn. ‘Butwewill putitto thetest one day.’ ‘May the day not be too long delayed,’ said Boromir. ‘For though I do not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us to know that others fought also with all the means that they have.’ ‘Then be comforted,’ said Elrond. ‘For there are other powers and realms that you know not, and they are hidden from you. Anduin the Great flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.’ ‘Still it might be well for all,’ said Glo´in the Dwarf, ‘if all these strengths were joined, and the powers of each were used in league. Other rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be used in our need. The Seven are lost to us – if Balin has not found the ring of Thro´r, which was the last; naught has been heard of it since Thro´r perished in Moria. Indeed I may now reveal that it was partly in hope to find that ring that Balin went away.’ ‘Balin will find no ring in Moria,’ said Gandalf. ‘Thro´r gave it to Thra´in his son, but not Thra´in to Thorin. It was taken with torment from Thra´in in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.’
350 the fellowship of the ring ‘Ah, alas!’ cried Glo´in. ‘When will the day come of our revenge? But still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves? Very mighty Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by the Dark Lord long ago. Are they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they not say?’ The Elves returned no answer. ‘Did you not hear me, Glo´in?’ said Elrond. ‘The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But of them it is not permitted tospeak.Somuchonlyinthishourofdoubt Imaynowsay. They are not idle. But they were not made as weapons of war or conquest: that is not their power. Those who made them did not desire strength or domination or hoarded wealth, but understanding, making, and healing, to preserve all things unstained. These things the Elves of Middle-earth have in some measure gained, though with sorrow. But all thathasbeenwroughtbythosewhowieldthe Threewillturn to their undoing, and their minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his purpose.’ ‘But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed, as you counsel?’ asked Glo´in. ‘We know not for certain,’ answered Elrond sadly. ‘Some hopethatthe Three Rings,which Sauronhasnevertouched, wouldthenbecomefree,andtheirrulersmighthealthehurts of the world that he has wrought. But maybe when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will fade and be forgotten. That is my belief.’ ‘Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,’ said Glorfindel, ‘ifby it the powerof Sauron maybe broken, and the fear of his dominion be taken away for ever.’ ‘Thus we returnonce more to the destroying ofthe Ring,’ said Erestor,‘andyetwecomenonearer.Whatstrengthhave we for the finding of the Fire in which it was made? That is the path of despair. Of folly I would say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me.’ ‘Despair, or folly?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is not despair, for
the council of elrond 351 despair is only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. Wedonot.Itiswisdomtorecognizenecessity,whenallother courses have been weighed, though as folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our cloak, a veil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs all things to a nicety in the scales of his malice. But the only measure that he knows is desire, desire for power; andsohejudgesallhearts.Intohisheartthethoughtwillnot enter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of reckoning.’ ‘At leastfor a while,’ said Elrond. ‘The roadmust be trod, butitwillbeveryhard.Andneitherstrengthnorwisdomwill carry us far upon it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong. Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small handsdothembecausetheymust,whiletheeyesofthegreat are elsewhere.’ ‘Verywell,verywell,Master Elrond!’said Bilbosuddenly. ‘Say no more! It is plain enough what you are pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit started this affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was very comfortable here, and getting on with my book. If you want to know, I am just writing an ending for it. I had thought of putting: and he lived happily ever afterwards to the end of his days. It is a good ending, and nonetheworseforhavingbeenusedbefore.Now Ishallhave to alter that: it does not look like coming true; and anyway there will evidently have to be several more chapters, if I live to write them. It is a frightful nuisance. When ought I to start?’ Boromir looked in surprise at Bilbo, but the laughter died on his lips when he saw that all the others regarded the old hobbit with grave respect. Only Glo´in smiled, but his smile came from old memories. ‘Ofcourse,mydear Bilbo,’said Gandalf.‘Ifyouhadreally startedthisaffair,youmightbeexpectedtofinishit.Butyou
352 the fellowship of the ring know well enough now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only a small part is played in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was meant, andwedonotdoubtthatunderjestyouaremakingavaliant offer. But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your part is ended, unless as a recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending unaltered! Thereisstillhopeforit.Butgetreadytowriteasequel,when they come back.’ Bilbo laughed. ‘I have never known you give me pleasant advice before,’ he said. ‘As all your unpleasant advice has been good, I wonder if this advice is not bad. Still, I don’t suppose Ihavethestrengthorlucklefttodealwiththe Ring. It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do you mean by they?’ ‘The messengers who are sent with the Ring.’ ‘Exactly! And who are they to be? That seems to me what this Council has to decide, and all that it has to decide. Elvesmaythriveonspeechalone,and Dwarvesenduregreat weariness; but I am only an old hobbit, and I miss my meal at noon. Can’t we think of some names now? Or put it off till after dinner?’ No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo glanced at all the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the Council sat with downcast eyes, as if in deep thought. A great dread fell on him, as if he was awaiting the pronouncementofsomedoomthathehadlongforeseenand vainlyhopedmightafterallneverbespoken.Anoverwhelm- ing longing to rest and remain at peace by Bilbo’s side in Rivendell filled all his heart. At last with an effort he spoke, and wondered to hear his own words, as if some other will was using his small voice. ‘I will take the Ring,’ he said, ‘though I do not know the way.’ * * *
the council of elrond 353 Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt his heart pierced by the sudden keenness of the glance. ‘If I understand aright all that I have heard,’ he said, ‘I think that this task is appointed for you, Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no one will. This is the hour of the Shire-folk, when they arise from their quiet fields to shake the towers and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise could have foreseen it? Or, if they are wise, why should they expect to know it, until the hour has struck? ‘But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that none could lay it on another. I do not lay it on you. But if you take it freely, I will say that your choice is right; and though all the mighty Elf-friends of old, Hador, and Hu´rin, and Tu´rin, and Beren himselfwereassembledtogether,yourseatshouldbeamong them.’ ‘But you won’t send him off alone surely, Master?’ cried Sam, unable to contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner where he had been quietly sitting on the floor. ‘Noindeed!’said Elrond,turningtowardshimwithasmile. ‘Youatleastshallgowithhim.Itishardlypossibletoseparate youfromhim,evenwhenheissummonedtoasecretcouncil and you are not.’ Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. ‘A nice pickle we have landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his head.
Chapter 3 THE RING GOES SOUTH Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo’s room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the Council, and had been chosen as Frodo’s companion. ‘It’s most unfair,’ said Pippin. ‘Instead of throwing him out, and clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!’ ‘Rewards!’said Frodo.‘Ican’timagineamoreseverepun- ishment. You are not thinking what you are saying: con- demned to go on this hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was done, and I could rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.’ ‘I don’t wonder,’ said Merry, ‘and I wish you could. But we are envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment for any of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a long way with you and been through some stiff times. We want to go on.’ ‘That’s what I meant,’ said Pippin. ‘We hobbits ought to stick together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There must be someone with intelligence in the party.’ ‘Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!’ said Gandalf,lookinginthroughthewindow,whichwasnear the ground. ‘But you are all worrying yourselves unnecess- arily. Nothing is decided yet.’ ‘Nothing decided!’ cried Pippin. ‘Then what were you all doing? You were shut up for hours.’ ‘Talking,’ said Bilbo. ‘There was a deal of talk, and every- one had an eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas’s bit of news about Gollum caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.’
the ring goes south 355 ‘You were wrong,’ said Gandalf. ‘You were inattentive. I had already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, theonlyrealeye-openers,asyouputit,wereyouand Frodo; and I was the only one that was not surprised.’ ‘Well, anyway,’ said Bilbo, ‘nothing was decided beyond choosing poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?’ ‘Yes,’ said the wizard. ‘Some of the scouts have been sent outalready.Morewillgotomorrow.Elrondissending Elves, and they will get in touch with the Rangers, and maybe with Thranduil’s folk in Mirkwood. And Aragorn has gone with Elrond’s sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for many long leagues before any move is made. So cheer up, Frodo! You will probably make quite a long stay here.’ ‘Ah!’ said Sam gloomily. ‘We’ll just wait long enough for winter to come.’ ‘That can’t be helped,’ said Bilbo. ‘It’s your fault partly, Frodo my lad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funny way of honouring it, I can’t help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s into Bag End. But thereitis:youcan’twaitnowtillspring;andyoucan’tgotill the reports come back. When winter first begins to bite and stones crack in the frosty night, when pools are black and trees are bare, ’tis evil in the Wild to fare. But that I am afraid will be just your luck.’ ‘I am afraid it will,’ said Gandalf. ‘We can’t start until we have found out about the Riders.’ ‘Ithoughttheywerealldestroyedintheflood,’said Merry. ‘You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,’ said Gandalf. ‘The power of their master is in them, and they stand or fall byhim.Wehopethattheywereallunhorsedandunmasked,
356 the fellowship of the ring andsomadeforawhilelessdangerous;butwemustfindout for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to help you; but I will whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.’ So great was Frodo’s delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat and bowed. ‘I only said I think I shall come. Donotcountonanythingyet.Inthismatter Elrondwillhave muchtosay,andyourfriendthe Strider.Whichremindsme, I want to see Elrond. I must be off.’ ‘How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to Bilbo when Gandalf had gone. ‘Oh, I don’t know. I can’t count days in Rivendell,’ said Bilbo. ‘But quite long, I should think. We can have many a goodtalk.Whatabouthelpingmewithmybook,andmaking a start on the next? Have you thought of an ending?’ ‘Yes,several,andallaredarkandunpleasant,’said Frodo. ‘Oh,thatwon’tdo!’said Bilbo.‘Booksoughttohavegood endings. How would this do: and they all settled down and lived together happily ever after?’ ‘It will do well, if it ever comes to that,’ said Frodo. ‘Ah!’ said Sam. ‘And where will they live? That’s what I often wonder.’ For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past journey and of the perils that lay ahead; but such was the virtue of the land of Rivendell that soon all fear and anxiety was lifted from their minds. The future, good or ill, was not forgotten, but ceased to have any power over the present.Healthandhopegrewstronginthem,andtheywere content with each good day as it came, taking pleasure in every meal, and in every word and song. So the days slipped away, as each morning dawned bright and fair, and each evening followed cool and clear. But autumnwaswaningfast;slowlythegoldenlightfadedtopale
the ring goes south 357 silver, and the lingering leaves fell from the naked trees. A wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to the east. The Hunter’s Moon waxed round in the night sky, and put to flightall the lesser stars.But low in the South one star shone red. Every night, as the Moon waned again, it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it from his window, deep in the heavens, burning like a watchful eye that glared above the trees on the brink of the valley. The hobbits had been nearly two months in the house of Elrond, and November had gone by with the last shreds of autumn, and December was passing, when the scouts began to return. Some had gone north beyond the springs of the Hoarwellintothe Ettenmoors;andothershadgonewest,and with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed the river by a ruined town. Many had gone east and south; and some of these had crossed the Mountainsandentered Mirkwood,whileothershadclimbed the pass at the sources of the Gladden River, and had come downinto Wilderlandandoverthe Gladden Fieldsandsoat length had reached the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel. Radagastwas notthere; andthey hadreturned overthe high pass that was called the Redhorn Gate. The sons of Elrond, Elladanand Elrohir,werethelasttoreturn;theyhadmadea great journey, passing down the Silverlode into a strange country,butoftheirerrandtheywouldnotspeaktoanysave to Elrond. In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings of the Riders or other servants of the Enemy. Even fromthe Eaglesofthe Misty Mountainstheyhadlearnedno fresh news. Nothing had been seen or heard of Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again far up the Great River. Three of the black horses had been found at once drowned in the flooded Ford. On the rocks of the rapids below it searchers discovered the bodies of five more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered. Of
358 the fellowship of the ring the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere wastheirpresencetobefelt.Itseemedthattheyhadvanished from the North. ‘Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we may hopenowthatthe Ringwraithswerescattered,andhavebeen obligedtoreturnasbesttheycouldtotheir Masterin Mordor, empty and shapeless. ‘Ifthatisso,itwillbesometimebeforetheycanbeginthe huntagain.Ofcoursethe Enemyhasotherservants,butthey will have to journey all the way to the borders of Rivendell before they can pick up our trail. And if we are careful that will be hard to find. But we must delay no longer.’ Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely at Frodo. ‘The time has come,’ he said. ‘If the Ring is to set out,itmustgosoon.Butthosewhogowithitmustnotcount on their errand being aided by war or force. They must pass intothedomainofthe Enemyfarfromaid.Doyoustillhold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?’ ‘I do,’ said Frodo. ‘I will go with Sam.’ ‘Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,’ said Elrond. ‘I can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved I do not know. The Shadow has creptnowtothefeetofthe Mountains,anddrawsnigheven to the borders of the Greyflood; and under the Shadow all is dark to me. You will meet many foes, some open, and some disguised; and you may find friends upon your way when you least look for it. I will send out messages, such as I can contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; but so perilous are the lands now become that some may well mis- carry, or come no quicker than you yourself. ‘And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far astheywillorfortuneallows.Thenumbermustbefew,since your hope is in speed and secrecy. Had I a host of Elves in armourofthe Elder Days,itwouldavaillittle,savetoarouse the power of Mordor.
the ring goes south 359 ‘The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers shall be set against the Nine Riders that are evil. With you and your faithful servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and maybe the end of his labours. ‘Fortherest,theyshallrepresenttheother Free Peoplesof the World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for the Elves;and Gimlisonof Glo´inforthe Dwarves.Theyare willing to go at least to the passes of the Mountains, and maybe beyond. For men you shall have Aragorn son of Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.’ ‘Strider!’ cried Frodo. ‘Yes,’ he said with a smile. ‘I ask leave once again to be your companion, Frodo.’ ‘I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, ‘only I thought you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.’ ‘I am,’ said Aragorn. ‘And the Sword-that-was-Broken shallbere-forgedere Isetouttowar.Butyourroadandour road lie together for many hundreds of miles. There- fore Boromir will also be in the Company. He is a valiant man.’ ‘Thereremaintwomoretobefound,’said Elrond.‘These I will consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.’ ‘Butthatwillleavenoplaceforus!’cried Pippinindismay. ‘Wedon’twanttobeleftbehind.Wewanttogowith Frodo.’ ‘That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what lies ahead,’ said Elrond. ‘Neitherdoes Frodo,’said Gandalf,unexpectedlysupport- ing Pippin. ‘Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that if these hobbits understood the danger, they would not dare to go. But they would still wish to go, or wish that they dared, and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in this matteritwouldbewelltotrustrathertotheirfriendshipthan to great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an Elf-lord, such as Glorfindel, he could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road to the Fire by the power that is in him.’ ‘You speak gravely,’ said Elrond, ‘but I am in doubt. The
360 the fellowship of the ring Shire, I forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two I had thought to send back there as messengers, to do what theycould,accordingtothefashionoftheircountry,towarn the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that the younger of these two, Peregrin Took, should remain. My heart is against his going.’ ‘Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send me home tied in a sack,’ said Pippin. ‘For otherwise I shall follow the Company.’ ‘Letitbesothen.Youshallgo,’said Elrond,andhesighed. ‘Now the tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.’ The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, andonitsbladewastracedadeviceofsevenstarssetbetween the crescent Moon and the rayed Sun, and about them was written many runes; for Aragorn son of Arathorn was going to war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was that sword when it was made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it, and the light of the moon shone cold, and itsedgewashardandkeen.And Aragorngaveitanewname and called it Andu´ril, Flame of the West. Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of theirroadandtheperilstheywouldmeet;andtheypondered the storied and figured maps and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with them; but he was content to lean on their guidance, and he spent as much time as he could with Bilbo. Inthoselastdaysthehobbitssattogetherintheeveningin the Hall of Fire,andthere amongmanytalesthey heardtold in full the lay of Beren and Lu´thien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo inhisownsmallroom.Then Bilbowouldreadpassagesfrom his book (which still seemed very incomplete), or scraps of his verses, or would take notes of Frodo’s adventures. Onthemorningofthelastday Frodowasalonewith Bilbo,
the ring goes south 361 and the old hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted the lid and fumbled inside. ‘Hereisyoursword,’hesaid.‘Butitwasbroken,youknow. I took it to keep it safe but I’ve forgotten to ask if the smiths could mend it. No time now. So I thought, perhaps, you would care to have this, don’t you know?’ He took from the box a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard. Then he drew it, and its polished and well-tended blade glittered suddenly, cold and bright. ‘This is Sting,’ he said, and thrust it with little effort deep into a wooden beam. ‘Take it, if you like. I shan’t want it again, I expect.’ Frodo accepted it gratefully. ‘Also there is this!’ said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed to be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several folds of old cloth, and held up a small shirt of mail. It was close-wovenofmanyrings,assupplealmostaslinen,coldas ice, and harder than steel. It shone like moonlit silver, and wasstuddedwithwhitegems.Withitwasabeltofpearland crystal. ‘It’s a pretty thing, isn’t it?’ said Bilbo, moving it in the light. ‘And useful. It is my dwarf-mail that Thorin gave me. Igotitbackfrom Michel Delvingbefore Istarted,andpacked it with my luggage. I brought all the mementoes of my Jour- ney away with me, except the Ring. But I did not expect to usethis,and Idon’tneeditnow,excepttolookatsometimes. You hardly feel any weight when you put it on.’ ‘Ishouldlook–well,Idon’tthink Ishouldlookrightinit,’ said Frodo. ‘Justwhat Isaidmyself,’said Bilbo.‘Butnevermindabout looks. You can wear it under your outer clothes. Come on! You must share this secret with me. Don’t tell anybody else! But I should feel happier if I knew you were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the knives of the Black Riders,’ he ended in a low voice. ‘Very well, I will take it,’ said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, and fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo
362 the fellowship of the ring putoverthetophis oldweather-stainedbreeches,tunic,and jacket. ‘Justaplainhobbityoulook,’said Bilbo.‘Butthereismore about you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!’ He turned away and looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune. ‘I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all your past kindnesses,’ said Frodo. ‘Don’ttry!’saidtheoldhobbit,turningroundandslapping him on the back. ‘Ow!’ he cried. ‘You are too hard now to slap! But there you are: Hobbits must stick together, and especially Bagginses. All I ask in return is: take as much care of yourself as you can, and bring back all the news you can, andanyoldsongsandtalesyoucancomeby.I’lldomybest tofinishmybookbeforeyoureturn.Ishouldliketowritethe second book, if I am spared.’ He broke off and turned to the window again, singing softly. I sit beside the fire and think of all that I have seen, of meadow-flowers and butterflies in summers that have been; Of yellow leaves and gossamer in autumns that there were, with morning mist and silver sun and wind upon my hair. I sit beside the fire and think of how the world will be when winter comes without a spring that I shall ever see. For still there are so many things that I have never seen: in every wood in every spring there is a different green.
the ring goes south 363 I sit beside the fire and think of people long ago, and people who will see a world that I shall never know. But all the while I sit and think of times there were before, I listen for returning feet and voices at the door. Itwasacoldgreydayneartheendof December.The East Wind was streaming through the bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark pines on the hills. Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead, dark and low. As the cheerless shadows of the early evening began to fall the Company madereadytosetout.Theyweretostartatdusk,for Elrond counselled them to journey under cover of night as often as they could, until they were far from Rivendell. ‘Youshouldfearthemanyeyesoftheservantsof Sauron,’ he said. ‘I do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached him, and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot and wing will be abroad inthenorthernlands.Evenoftheskyaboveyoumustbeware as you go on your way.’ The Company took little gear of war, for their hope was in secrecy not in battle. Aragorn had Andu´ril but no other weapon, and he went forth clad only in rusty green and brown, as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a long sword,infashionlike Andu´rilbutoflesslineage,andhebore also a shield and his war-horn. ‘Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,’ he said, ‘and then let all the foes of Gondor flee!’ Putting it to his lips he blew a blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock,andallthatheardthatvoicein Rivendellsprangtotheir feet. ‘Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir,’
364 the fellowship of the ring said Elrond, ‘until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and dire need is on you.’ ‘Maybe,’ said Boromir.‘But always I have let myhorn cry at setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth as a thief in the night.’ Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel- rings, for dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed axe. Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white knife. The younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from the barrow; but Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden. Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was the elven-sword Glamdring, the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain. Allwerewellfurnishedby Elrondwiththickwarmclothes, and they had jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food and clothes and blankets and other needs were laden on a pony, none other than the poor beast that they had brought from Bree. Thestayin Rivendellhadworkedagreatwonderofchange onhim:hewasglossyandseemedtohavethevigourofyouth. Itwas Samwhohadinsistedonchoosinghim,declaringthat Bill (as he called him) would pine, if he did not come. ‘That animal can nearly talk,’ he said, ‘and would talk, if he stayed here much longer. He gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it: if you don’t let me go with you, Sam, I’ll follow on my own.’ So Bill was going as the beast ofburden,yethewastheonlymemberofthe Companythat did not seem depressed. Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire, and they were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the door- step beside Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to him.
the ring goes south 365 The others could be seen as grey shapes in the darkness. Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staringmoodilyintothegloomwheretheriverroaredstonily below; his desire for adventure was at its lowest ebb. ‘Bill, my lad,’ he said, ‘you oughtn’t to have took up with us. You could have stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes.’ Bill swished his tail and said nothing. Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in his mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had forgotten anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little box of salt that he always carried and refilled when he could; a good supply of pipe-weed (but not near enough, I’ll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen hose; linen; various small belongings of his master’s that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in triumph when they were called for. He went through them all. ‘Rope!’ he muttered. ‘No rope! And only last night you saidtoyourself:‘‘Sam,whataboutabitofrope?You’llwant it, if you haven’t got it.’’ Well, I’ll want it. I can’t get it now.’ At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the Company to him. ‘This is my last word,’ he said in a low voice. ‘The Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom.Onhimaloneisanychargelaid:neitherto cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the Company and the Council, and only then in gravest need. The others go with him as free companions, to help him on his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into other paths, as chance allows. The further you go, the less easywillitbetowithdraw;yetnooathorbondislaidonyou to go further than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.’ ‘Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,’ said Gimli.
366 the fellowship of the ring ‘Maybe,’ said Elrond, ‘but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has not seen the nightfall.’ ‘Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,’ said Gimli. ‘Or break it,’ said Elrond. ‘Look not too far ahead! But go nowwithgoodhearts!Farewell,andmaytheblessingof Elves and Men and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!’ ‘Good ... good luck!’ cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. ‘I don’t suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad,but Ishallexpectafullaccountwhenyougetback.And don’t be too long! Farewell!’ Many others of Elrond’s household stood in the shadows andwatchedthemgo,biddingthemfarewellwithsoftvoices. There was no laughter, and no song or music. At last they turned away and faded silently into the dusk. They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths that led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length to the high moor where the wind hissed through the heather. Then with one glance at the Last Homely House twinkling below them they strode away far into the night. At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwardswentonbynarrowpathsamongthefoldedlands. Theirpurposewastoholdthiscoursewestofthe Mountains for many miles and days. The country was much rougher and more barren than in the green vale of the Great River in Wilderland on the other side of the range, and their going would be slow; but they hoped in this way to escape the notice of unfriendly eyes. The spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom been seen in this empty country, and the paths were little known except to the people of Rivendell. Gandalfwalkedinfront,andwithhimwent Aragorn,who knew this land even in the dark. The others were in file behind,and Legolaswhoseeyeswerekeenwastherearguard.
the ring goes south 367 Thefirstpartoftheirjourneywashardanddreary,and Frodo remembered little of it, save the wind. For many sunless days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed able to keep out its searching fingers. Though the Company was well clad, they seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during the middle of the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden underthetangledthorn-bushesthatgrewinthicketsinmany places. In the late afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold and cheerless as a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a fire. In the evening theywentonagain,alwaysasnearlysouthwardastheycould find a way. At first it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked and stumbled until they were weary, they were creeping for- ward like snails, and getting nowhere. Each day the land looked much the same as it had the day before. Yet steadily the mountains were drawing nearer. South of Rivendell they rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the feet of themainrangetherewastumbledaneverwiderlandofbleak hills,anddeepvalleysfilledwithturbulentwaters.Pathswere few and winding, and led them often only to the edge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps. They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The wind suddenly fell and then veered round to the south. The swift-flowing clouds lifted and melted away, and the sun came out, pale and bright. There came a cold clear dawn at the end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellers reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly- trees whose grey-green trunks seemed to have been built out of the very stone of the hills. Their dark leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun. Awayinthesouth Frodocouldseethedimshapesoflofty mountainsthatseemednowtostandacrossthepaththatthe Companywastaking.Attheleftofthishighrangerosethree peaks;thetallestandneareststooduplikeatoothtippedwith
368 the fellowship of the ring snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still largely in theshadow,butwherethesunlightslanteduponit,itglowed red. Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. ‘We have done well,’ he said. ‘We have reached the bordersofthecountrythat Mencall Hollin;many Elveslived here in happier days, when Eregion was its name. Five-and- forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many long miles further our feet have walked. The land and the weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.’ ‘Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said Frodo, throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face. ‘Butthemountainsareaheadofus,’said Pippin.‘Wemust have turned eastwards in the night.’ ‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you see further ahead in the clear light.Beyondthosepeakstherangebendsroundsouth-west. There are many maps in Elrond’s house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?’ ‘Yes Idid,sometimes,’said Pippin,‘but Idon’tremember them. Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.’ ‘I need no map,’ said Gimli, who had come up with Legolas, and was gazing out before him with a strange light inhisdeepeyes.‘Thereisthelandwhereourfathersworked of old, and we have wrought the image of those mountains into many works of metal and of stone, and into many songs and tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shathuˆr. ‘Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but I know them and their names, for under them lies Khazad-duˆm, the Dwarrowdelf, that is now called the Black Pit, Moria in the Elvish tongue. Yonder stands Barazinbar, the Redhorn,cruel Caradhras;andbeyondhimare Silvertine and Cloudyhead: Celebdil the White, and Fanuidhol the Grey, that we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathuˆr. ‘There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their
the ring goes south 369 arms lies the deep-shadowed valley which we cannot for- get: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale, which the Elves call Nanduhirion.’ ‘Itisforthe Dimrill Dalethatwearemaking,’said Gandalf. ‘If we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under thefarsideof Caradhras,weshallcomedownbythe Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises in its icy springs.’ ‘Darkis thewaterof Kheled-zaˆram,’said Gimli, ‘andcold arethespringsof Kibil-naˆla.Myhearttremblesatthethought that I may see them soon.’ ‘May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf!’ said Gandalf. ‘But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay inthatvalley.Wemustgodownthe Silverlodeintothesecret woods, and so to the Great River, and then——’ He paused. ‘Yes, and where then?’ asked Merry. ‘Totheendofthejourney–intheend,’said Gandalf.‘We cannot look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the first stage is safely over. I think we will rest here, not only today but tonightaswell.Thereisawholesomeairabout Hollin.Much evil must befall a country before it wholly forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.’ ‘Thatistrue,’said Legolas.‘Butthe Elvesofthislandwere of a race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and thegrassdonotnowrememberthem.Only Ihearthestones lament them: deep they delved us, fair they wrought us, high theybuildedus;buttheyaregone.Theyaregone.Theysought the Havens long ago.’ That morning they lit a fire in a deep hollow shrouded by greatbushesofholly,andtheirsupper-breakfastwasmerrier than it had been since they set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they expected to have all the night to sleep in, and they did not mean to go on again until the eveningofthenextday.Only Aragornwassilentandrestless.
370 the fellowship of the ring After a while he left the Company and wandered on to the ridge; there he stood in the shadow of a tree, looking out southwards and westwards, with his head posed as if he was listening.Thenhereturnedtothebrinkofthedellandlooked down at the others laughing and talking. ‘What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ‘What are you looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?’ ‘No indeed,’ he answered. ‘But I miss something. I have beeninthecountryof Hollininmanyseasons.Nofolkdwell here now, but many other creatures live here at all times, especially birds. Yet now all things but you are silent. I can feelit.Thereisnosoundformilesaboutus,andyourvoices seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.’ Gandalflookedupwithsuddeninterest.‘Butwhatdoyou guess is the reason?’ he asked. ‘Is there more in it than sur- prise at seeing four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen or heard?’ ‘Ihopethatisit,’answered Aragorn.‘But Ihaveasenseof watchfulness,andoffear,that Ihaveneverhadherebefore.’ ‘Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you bring a Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.’ It was Sam’s turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The swish of the pony’s tail and the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam couldhearhisownjointscreaking,ifhestirred.Deadsilence was around him, and over all hung a clear blue sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. Away in the South a dark patch appeared,andgrew,anddrovenorthlikeflyingsmokeinthe wind. ‘What’s that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud,’ said Sam in a whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intentlyatthesky;butbeforelong Samcouldseeforhimself
the ring goes south 371 what was approaching. Flocks ofbirds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all the land as if they were searching for something; and they were steadily drawing nearer. ‘Lie flat and still!’ hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shade of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from the main host, and came, flying low,straighttowardstheridge.Samthoughttheywereakind of crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense a throng that their shadow followed them darkly over the ground below, one harsh croak was heard. Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west, and the sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he sprang up and went and wakened Gandalf. ‘Regiments of black crows are flying over all the land between the Mountains and the Greyflood,’ he said, ‘and theyhavepassedover Hollin.Theyarenotnativeshere;they arecrebainoutof Fangornand Dunland.Idonotknowwhat they are about: possibly there is some trouble away south from which they are fleeing; but I think they are spying out the land. I have also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky. I think we ought to move again this evening. Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.’ ‘And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,’ said Gandalf; ‘and how we can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you are right.’ ‘Luckily our fire made little smoke, and had burned low before the crebain came,’ said Aragorn. ‘It must be put out and not lit again.’ ‘Well if that isn’t a plague and a nuisance!’ said Pippin. The news: no fire, and a move again by night, had been broken to him, as soon as he woke in the late afternoon. ‘All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight: something hot.’ ‘Well, you can go on looking forward,’ said Gandalf.
372 the fellowship of the ring ‘There may be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: it will get warmer as we get south.’ ‘Too warm, I shouldn’t wonder,’ muttered Sam to Frodo. ‘But I’m beginning to think it’s time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain, and saw the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn, or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke his piece. A fair jaw-cracker dwarf-language must be!’ Maps conveyed nothing to Sam’s mind,and alldistances inthese strangelands seemedso vast that he was quite out of his reckoning. All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds passed over now and again; but as the westering Sun grewredtheydisappearedsouthwards.Atduskthe Company set out, and turning now half east they steered their course towards Caradhras,whichfarawaystillglowedfaintlyredin the last light of the vanished Sun. One by one white stars sprang forth as the sky faded. Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodoliketheremainsofanancientroad,thathadoncebeen broad and well planned, from Hollin to the mountain-pass. The Moon,nowatthefull,roseoverthemountains,andcast apalelightinwhichtheshadowsofstoneswereblack.Many of them looked to have been worked by hands, though now they lay tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land. It was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt a shadow pass over the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and then flashed out again. He shivered. ‘Didyouseeanythingpassover?’hewhisperedto Gandalf, who was just ahead. ‘No,but Ifeltit,whatever itwas,’heanswered. ‘Itmaybe nothing, only a wisp of thin cloud.’ ‘Itwasmovingfastthen,’muttered Aragorn,‘andnotwith the wind.’ * * *
the ring goes south 373 Nothing further happened that night. The next morning dawnedevenbrighterthanbefore.Buttheairwaschillagain; already the wind was turning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbing steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and the mountainstoweredup,nearerandnearer.Onthethirdmorn- ing Caradhras rose before them, a mighty peak, tipped with snow like silver, but with sheer naked sides, dull red as if stained with blood. There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. The wind had gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked back. ‘Winter deepens behind us,’ he said quietly to Aragorn. ‘The heights away north are whiter than they were; snow is lying far down their shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up towards the Redhorn Gate. We may well be seen by watchers on that narrow path, and waylaid by some evil; but the weather may prove a more deadly enemy than any. What do you think of your course now, Aragorn?’ Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and Aragorn were continuing some debate that had begun long before. He listened anxiously. ‘I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well, Gandalf,’ answered Aragorn. ‘And perils known and unknown will grow as we go on. But we must go on; and it is no good our delaying the passage of the moun- tains.Furthersouththerearenopasses,tillonecomestothe Gap of Rohan. I do not trust that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows which side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?’ ‘Who knows indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is another way, and not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.’ ‘But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others, I beg, not until it is plain that there is no other way.’ ‘Wemustdecidebeforewegofurther,’answered Gandalf.
374 the fellowship of the ring ‘Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest and sleep,’ said Aragorn. In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast, Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in grey cloud. Frodo watched them, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned to the Company Gandalf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face the weather and the high pass.Hewasrelieved.Hecouldnotguesswhatwastheother dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned. ‘From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ‘I fear that the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the weather that is coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go with all the speed that we can. Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top ofthepass.Darkwillcomeearlythisevening.Wemustleave as soon as you can get ready.’ ‘Iwilladdawordofadvice,if Imay,’said Boromir.‘Iwas born under the shadow of the White Mountains and know somethingofjourneysinthehighplaces.Weshallmeetbitter cold, if no worse, before we come down on the other side. It will nothelp usto keepso secretthat weare frozen todeath. When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and bushes, each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.’ ‘And Bill could take a bit more, couldn’t you, lad?’ said Sam. The pony looked at him mournfully. ‘Very well,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we must not use the wood – not unless it is a choice between fire and death.’ The Company set out again, with good speed at first; but soon their way became steep and difficult. The twisting and climbing road had in many places almost disappeared,
the ring goes south 375 and was blocked with many fallen stones. The night grew deadlydarkundergreatclouds.Abitterwindswirledamong the rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the greatmountains.Thenarrowpathnowwoundunderasheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which the grim flanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine. Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment at the top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He putouthisarmandsawthedimwhiteflakesofsnowsettling on his sleeve. They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, filling all the air, and swirling into Frodo’s eyes. The dark bentshapesof Gandalfand Aragornonlyapaceortwoahead could hardly be seen. ‘I don’t like this at all,’ panted Sam just behind. ‘Snow’s all right on a fine morning, but I like to be in bed while it’s falling. I wish this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.’ Except on the high moors of the North- farthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire, and was regarded as a pleasant event and a chance for fun. No living hobbit (save Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311, when white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen Brandywine. Gandalfhalted.Snowwasthickonhishoodandshoulders; it was already ankle-deep about his boots. ‘This is what I feared,’ he said. ‘What do you say now, Aragorn?’ ‘That I feared it too,’ Aragorn answered, ‘but less than other things. I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save high up in the mountains. But we are not high yet; we are still far down, where the paths are usually open all the winter.’ ‘I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,’ said Boromir.‘Theysayinmylandthathecangovernthestorms in the Mountains of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.’
376 the fellowship of the ring ‘His arm has grown long indeed,’ said Gimli, ‘if he can draw snow down from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.’ ‘His arm has grown long,’ said Gandalf. While they were halted, the wind died down, and the snow slackened until it almost ceased. They tramped on again. But they had not gone more than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh fury. The wind whistled and the snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir found ithardtokeepgoing.Thehobbits,bentnearlydouble, toiled along behind the taller folk, but it was plain that they could not go much further, if the snow continued. Frodo’s feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even Gimli, as stout as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged. The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an agreementwithoutanywordsbeingspoken.Theyheardeerie noises in the darkness round them. It may have been only a trick of the wind in the cracks and gullies of the rocky wall, but the sounds were those of shrill cries, and wild howls of laughter.Stonesbegantofallfromthemountain-side,whist- ling over their heads, or crashing on the path beside them. Every now and again they heard a dull rumble, as a great boulder rolled down from hidden heights above. ‘We cannot go further tonight,’ said Boromir. ‘Let those call it the wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are aimed at us.’ ‘I do call it the wind,’ said Aragorn. ‘But that does not make what you say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have little love for those that go on two legs, and yet are not in league with Sauron, buthavepurposesoftheirown.Somehavebeeninthisworld longer than he.’ ‘Caradhraswascalledthe Cruel,andhadanillname,’said Gimli,‘longyearsago,whenrumourof Sauronhadnotbeen heard in these lands.’
the ring goes south 377 ‘Itmatterslittlewhoistheenemy,ifwecannotbeatoffhis attack,’ said Gandalf. ‘But what can we do?’ cried Pippin miserably. He was leaning on Merry and Frodo, and he was shivering. ‘Either stop where we are, or go back,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is no good going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough atthebottomofalonghardslope.Weshouldhavenoshelter there from snow, or stones – or anything else.’ ‘And it is no good going back while the storm holds,’ said Aragorn.‘Wehavepassednoplaceonthewayupthatoffered more shelter than this cliff-wall we are under now.’ ‘Shelter!’ muttered Sam. ‘If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof make a house.’ The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff as they could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom it leaned out a little, so that they hoped it would give them someprotectionfromthenortherlywindandfromthefalling stones. But eddying blasts swirled round them from every side, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds. Theyhuddledtogetherwiththeirbackstothewall.Billthe pony stood patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits, and screened them a little; but before long the drifting snow was above his hocks, and it went on mounting. If they had hadnolargercompanionsthehobbitswouldsoonhavebeen entirely buried. Agreatsleepinesscameover Frodo;hefelthimselfsinking fast into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes, and out of the shadows on the other side of thehearthheheard Bilbo’svoicespeaking.Idon’tthinkmuch ofyourdiary,hesaid.Snowstormson Januarythetwelfth:there was no need to come back to report that! But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an effort, when he felt himself shaken, and he came back pain- fully to wakefulness. Boromir had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.
378 the fellowship of the ring ‘This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,’ said Boromir.‘Itisuselesstosithereuntilthesnowgoesoverour heads. We must do something to save ourselves.’ ‘Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out a leathern flask. ‘Just a mouthful each – for all ofus.Itisveryprecious.Itismiruvor,thecordialof Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting. Pass it round!’ As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liquor he felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left his limbs. The others also revived and found fresh hope and vigour. But the snow did not relent. It whirled about them thicker than ever, and the wind blew louder. ‘What do you say to fire?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ‘The choice seems near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us, but that will not help us.’ ‘You may make a fire, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ‘If there are any watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, fire or no.’ But though they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice of Boromir, it passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strikeaflamethatwouldholdamidtheswirlingwindorcatch in the wet fuel. At last reluctantly Gandalf himself took a hand. Picking up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and then with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen! he thrusttheendofhisstaffintothemidstofit.Atonceagreat spout of green and blue flame sprang out, and the wood flared and sputtered. ‘Ifthereareanytosee,then Iatleastamrevealedtothem,’ he said. ‘I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’ But the Company cared no longer for watchers or un- friendly eyes. Their hearts were rejoiced to see the light of the fire. The wood burned merrily; and though all round it the snow hissed, and pools of slush crept under their feet, they warmed their hands gladly at the blaze. There they
the ring goes south 379 stood, stooping in a circle round the little dancing and blow- ing flames. A red light was on their tired and anxious faces; behind them the night was like a black wall. But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell. The fire burned low, and the last faggot was thrown on. ‘The night is getting old,’ said Aragorn. ‘The dawn is not far off.’ ‘If any dawn can pierce these clouds,’ said Gimli. Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the blackness. ‘The snow is growing less,’ he said, ‘and the wind is quieter.’ Frodogazedwearilyattheflakesstillfallingoutofthedark to be revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying fire;butforalongtimehecouldseenosignoftheirslacken- ing. Then suddenly, as sleep was beginning to creep over himagain,hewasawarethatthewindhadindeedfallen,and theflakeswerebecominglargerandfewer.Veryslowlyadim light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether. As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded world. Below their refuge were white humps and domes and shapelessdeepsbeneathwhichthepaththattheyhadtrodden was altogether lost; but the heights above were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow. Gimli looked up and shook his head. ‘Caradhras has not forgiven us,’ he said. ‘He has more snow yet to fling at us, if we go on. The sooner we go back and down the better.’ To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difficult. It mightwellproveimpossible.Onlyafewpacesfromtheashes of their fire the snow lay many feet deep, higher than the headsofthehobbits;inplacesithadbeenscoopedandpiled by the wind into great drifts against the cliff. ‘If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a path for you,’ said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone of the Company remained still light of heart. ‘If Elvescouldflyovermountains,theymightfetchthe Sun
380 the fellowship of the ring tosaveus,’answered Gandalf.‘But Imusthavesomethingto work on. I cannot burn snow.’ ‘Well,’said Boromir,‘whenheadsareatalossbodiesmust serve, as we say in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See! Though all is now snow-clad, our path, as wecameup,turnedaboutthatshoulderofrockdownyonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we could reach that point, maybe it would prove easier beyond. It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.’ ‘Thenletusforceapaththither,youand I!’said Aragorn. Aragornwasthetallestofthe Company,but Boromir,little less in height, was broader and heavier in build. He led the way, and Aragorn followed him.Slowly they moved off, and weresoontoilingheavily.Inplacesthesnowwasbreast-high, and often Boromir seemed to be swimming or burrowing with his great arms rather than walking. Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his lips, and then he turned to the others. ‘The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, but choose an otter for swimming, and for running light over grass and leaf, or over snow – an Elf.’ With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if for the first time, though he had long known it, that the Elfhadnoboots,butworeonlylightshoes,ashealwaysdid, and his feet made little imprint in the snow. ‘Farewell!’hesaidto Gandalf.‘Igotofindthe Sun!’Then swift as a runner over firm sand he shot away, and quickly overtakingthetoilingmen,withawaveofhishandhepassed them, and sped into the distance, and vanished round the rocky turn. The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragorn dwindled into black specks in the whiteness. At length they too passed from sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of snow came curling down again. An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer,
the ring goes south 381 and then at last they saw Legolas coming back. At the same time Boromir and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far behind him and came labouring up the slope. ‘Well,’ cried Legolas as he ran up, ‘I have not brought the Sun.Sheiswalkinginthebluefieldsofthe South,andalittle wreath of snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have brought back a gleam of good hope for those whoaredoomedtogoonfeet.Thereisthegreatestwind-drift of all just beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men were almostburied.Theydespaired,until Ireturnedandtoldthem that the drift was little wider than a wall. And on the other side the snow suddenly grows less, while further down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit’s toes.’ ‘Ah, it is as I said,’ growled Gimli. ‘It was no ordinary storm. It is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and that drift was laid to cut off our escape.’ ‘But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with you,’ said Boromir, who came up at that moment. ‘And doughty Men too, if I may say it; though lesser men with spades might have served you better. Still, we have thrust a lane through the drift; and for that all here may be grateful who cannot run as light as Elves.’ ‘But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through the drift?’ said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits. ‘Have hope!’ said Boromir. ‘I am weary, but I still have some strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others no doubt will make shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will begin with you.’ Heliftedupthehobbit.‘Clingtomyback!Ishallneedmy arms,’hesaidandstrodeforward.Aragornwith Merrycame behind. Pippin marvelled at his strength, seeing the passage that he had already forced with no other tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the track for those who followed, thrusting the snow aside as he went. They came at length to the great drift. It was flung across
382 the fellowship of the ring themountain-pathlikeasheerandsuddenwall,anditscrest, sharpasifshapedwithknives,rearedupmorethantwicethe height of Boromir; but through the middle a passage had been beaten, rising and falling like a bridge. On the far side Merryand Pippinweresetdown,andtheretheywaitedwith Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive. After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in thenarrowbutnowwell-troddentrackcame Gandalf,leading Bill with Gimli perched among the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane; but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumblethererolleddownafallofstonesandslitheringsnow. The spray of it half blinded the Company as they crouched againstthecliff,andwhentheairclearedagaintheysawthat the path was blocked behind them. ‘Enough,enough!’cried Gimli.‘Wearedepartingasquickly aswemay!’Andindeedwiththatlaststrokethemaliceofthe mountainseemedtobeexpended,asif Caradhraswassatisfied thattheinvadershadbeenbeatenoffandwould not dare to return. The threat of snow lifted; the clouds began to break and the light grew broader. As Legolashadreported,theyfoundthatthesnowbecame steadily more shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soon they all stood once more ontheflatshelfattheheadofthesteepslopewheretheyhad felt the first flakes of snow the night before. The morning was now far advanced. From the high place they looked back westwards over the lower lands. Far away in the tumble of country that lay at the foot of the mountain was the dell from which they had started to climb the pass. Frodo’slegsached.Hewaschilledtotheboneandhungry; andhisheadwas dizzyashethoughtofthe longandpainful march downhill. Black specks swam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the distance below him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dots were circling in the air. ‘The birds again!’ said Aragorn, pointing down.
the ring goes south 383 ‘Thatcannotbehelpednow,’said Gandalf.‘Whetherthey aregoodorevil,orhavenothingtodowithusatall,wemust go down at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!’ A cold wind flowed down behind them, as they turned theirbacksonthe Redhorn Gate,andstumbledwearilydown the slope. Caradhras had defeated them.
Chapter 4 A JOURNEY IN THE DARK It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when they halted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were veiled in deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more mouthful each of the miruvor of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he called a council. ‘We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,’ he said. ‘The attack on the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a while.’ ‘And then where are we to go?’ asked Frodo. ‘We still have our journey and our errand before us,’ answered Gandalf. ‘We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.’ Pippin’s face brightened visibly at the mere mention of returnto Rivendell;Merryand Samlookeduphopefully.But Aragorn and Boromir made no sign. Frodo looked troubled. ‘I wish I was back there,’ he said. ‘But how can I return withoutshame–unlessthereisindeednootherway,andwe are already defeated?’ ‘Youareright,Frodo,’said Gandalf:‘togobackistoadmit defeat, and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring must remain there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time it will be destroyed. The Ringwraiths are deadly enemies, but they are only shadows yet of the power and terror they would possess if the Ruling Ring was on their master’s hand again.’ ‘Then we must go on, if there is a way,’ said Frodo with a sigh. Sam sank back into gloom. ‘There is a way that we may attempt,’ said Gandalf. ‘I
a journey in the dark 385 thoughtfromthebeginning,whenfirst Iconsideredthisjour- ney, that we should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before. Aragorn was againstit,untilthepassoverthemountainshadatleastbeen tried.’ ‘If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil indeed,’ said Merry. ‘But you had better tell us about it, and let us know the worst at once.’ ‘Theroadthat Ispeakofleadstothe Minesof Moria,’said Gandalf. Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering fire was in his eyes. On all the others a dread fell at the mention of that name. Even to the hobbits it was a legend of vague fear. ‘Theroadmayleadto Moria,buthowcanwehopethatit will lead through Moria?’ said Aragorn darkly. ‘It is a name of ill omen,’ said Boromir. ‘Nor do I see the need to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, where men are friendly to my people, taking the road that I followed on my way hither. Or we might pass by and cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin, and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea.’ ‘Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him I may have business of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that canbyanymeansbeprevented.The Gapof Rohanisclosed to us while we go with the Bearer. ‘As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We might spend a year in such a journey, and we should pass throughmanylandsthatareemptyandharbourless.Yetthey would not be safe. The watchful eyes both of Saruman and of the Enemy are on them. When you came north, Boromir, you were in the Enemy’s eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of small concern to him: his mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you return now as a member of the Ring’s Company, and you are in peril as
386 the fellowship of the ring long as you remain with us. The danger will increase with every league that we go south under the naked sky. ‘Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has become more desperate, I fear. I see now little hope, if we do not soon vanish from sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go neither over the mountains, nor round them, but under them. That is a road at any rate that the Enemy will least expect us to take.’ ‘Wedonotknowwhatheexpects,’said Boromir.‘Hemay watchallroads,likelyandunlikely.Inthatcasetoenter Moria would be to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is black.’ ‘You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to the stronghold of Sauron,’ answered Gandalf. ‘I alone of you have ever been in the dungeons of the Dark Lord,andonlyinhisolderandlesserdwellingin Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-duˆr do not return. But I would not lead you into Moria if there were no hope of comingoutagain.Ifthereare Orcsthere,itmayproveillfor us,thatistrue.Butmostofthe Orcsofthe Misty Mountains werescatteredordestroyedinthe Battleof Five Armies.The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there is a hope that Moria is still free. ‘There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that in some deep hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However it may prove, one must tread the path that need chooses!’ ‘Iwilltreadthepathwithyou,Gandalf!’said Gimli.‘Iwill go and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there – if you can find the doors that are shut.’ ‘Good, Gimli!’ said Gandalf. ‘You encourage me. We will seek the hidden doors together. And we will come through. In the ruins of the Dwarves, a dwarf’s head will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not be the first time that I have been to Moria. I sought there long
a journey in the dark 387 for Thra´in son of Thro´r after he was lost. I passed through, and I came out again alive!’ ‘I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,’ said Aragorn quietly; ‘but though I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria a second time.’ ‘And I don’t wish to enter it even once,’ said Pippin. ‘Nor me,’ muttered Sam. ‘Of course not!’ said Gandalf. ‘Who would? But the ques- tion is: who will follow me, if I lead you there?’ ‘I will,’ said Gimli eagerly. ‘Iwill,’said Aragornheavily.‘Youfollowedmyleadalmost to disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. I willfollowyourleadnow–ifthislastwarningdoesnotmove you. It is not of the Ring, nor of us others that I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware!’ ‘I will not go,’ said Boromir; ‘not unless the vote of the whole Company is against me. What do Legolas and the little folk say? The Ring-bearer’s voice surely should be heard?’ ‘I do not wish to go to Moria,’ said Legolas. The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. ‘I do not wish to go,’ he said; ‘but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slept on it. Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold gloom. How the wind howls!’ At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the wind hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and wailing round them in the empty spaces of the night. Suddenly Aragorn leaptto his feet. ‘Howthe wind howls!’ he cried. ‘It is howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs have come west of the Mountains!’ ‘Need we wait until morning then?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is as I said. The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who
388 the fellowship of the ring now will wishto journey south by night withthe wild wolves on his trail?’ ‘How far is Moria?’ asked Boromir. ‘There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some fifteen miles as the crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,’ answered Gandalf grimly. ‘Thenletusstartassoonasitislighttomorrow,ifwecan,’ said Boromir. ‘The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears.’ ‘True!’ said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. ‘But where the warg howls, there also the orc prowls.’ ‘I wish I had taken Elrond’s advice,’ muttered Pippin to Sam. ‘I am no good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer in me: these howls freeze my blood. I don’t ever remember feeling so wretched.’ ‘My heart’sright down in mytoes, Mr. Pippin,’said Sam. ‘But we aren’t etten yet, and there are some stout folk here withus.Whatevermaybeinstoreforold Gandalf,I’llwager it isn’t a wolf’s belly.’ Fortheirdefenceinthenightthe Companyclimbedtothe top of the small hill under which they had been sheltering. It was crowned with a knot of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle of boulder-stones. In the midst of this they lit a fire, for there was no hope that darkness and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs. Round the fire they sat, and those that were not on guard dozed uneasily. Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated wherehestood.Thehowlingofthewolveswasnowallround them, sometimes nearer and sometimes further off. In the dead of night many shining eyes were seen peering over the browofthehill.Someadvancedalmosttotheringofstones. At a gap in the circle a great dark wolf-shape could be seen halted, gazing at them. A shuddering howl broke from him, as if he were a captain summoning his pack to the assault.
a journey in the dark 389 Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. ‘Listen, Hound of Sauron!’ he cried. ‘Gandalf is here. Fly, if you value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.’ The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great leap. At that moment there was a sharp twang. Legolas had loosed his bow. There was a hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to the ground; the Elvish arrow had pierced its throat. The watching eyes were suddenly extinguished. Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting packs had fled. All about them the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on the sighing wind. The night was old, and westward the waning moon was setting, gleaming fitfully through the breaking clouds. Sud- denly Frodo started from sleep. Without warning a storm of howls broke out fierce and wild all about the camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking them from every side at once. ‘Flingfuelonthefire!’cried Gandalftothehobbits.‘Draw your blades, and stand back to back!’ In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many grey shapes spring over the ring of stones. More and more followed. Through the throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with a great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood with his stout legs apart, wielding his dwarf-axe. The bow of Legolas was singing. Inthewaveringfirelight Gandalfseemedsuddenlytogrow: he rose up, a great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of stone set upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to meet the wolves.Theygavebackbeforehim.Highintheairhetossed theblazingbrand.Itflaredwithasuddenwhiteradiancelike lightning; and his voice rolled like thunder. ‘Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!’ he cried. There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him
390 the fellowship of the ring burst into a leaf and bloom of blinding flame. The fire leapt from tree-top to tree-top. The whole hill was crowned with dazzlinglight.Theswordsandknivesofthedefendersshone and flickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in the air as it flew, and plunged burning into the heart of a great wolf-chieftain. All the others fled. Slowlythefiredied tillnothingwasleftbutfalling ashand sparks; a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly from the hill, as the first light of dawn came dimly in the sky. Their enemies were routed and did not return. ‘What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin?’ said Sam, sheathing his sword. ‘Wolves won’t get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake! Nearly singed the hair off my head!’ When the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves were to be found, and they looked in vain for the bodies of the dead. No trace of the fight remained but the charredtreesand thearrowsof Legolas lyingonthehill-top. All were undamaged save one of which only the point was left. ‘It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. ‘These were no ordinary wolves hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!’ That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command of some power that had no longer any use for snow, since they had retreated from the pass, a power that wished now to have a clear light in which things that moved in the wild could be seen from far away. The wind had been turning through north to north-west during the night, and now it failed. The clouds vanished southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue. As they stood upon thehillside,readytodepart,apalesunlightgleamedoverthe mountain-tops. ‘Wemustreachthedoorsbeforesunset,’said Gandalf,‘or Ifearweshallnotreachthematall.Itisnotfar,butourpath may be winding, for here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has
a journey in the dark 391 seldom walked in this country, and only once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago. ‘There it lies,’ he said, pointing away south-eastwards to wherethemountains’sidesfellsheerintotheshadowsattheir feet. In the distance could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, and in their midst, taller than the rest, one great grey wall. ‘When we left the pass I led you southwards, and not back to our starting point, as some of you may have noticed. It is wellthat Ididso,fornowwehaveseveralmileslesstocross, and haste is needed. Let us go!’ ‘I do not know which to hope,’ said Boromir grimly: ‘that Gandalf will find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, and tobecaughtbetweenwolvesandthewallthelikeliestchance. Lead on!’ Gimlinowwalkedaheadbythewizard’sside,soeagerwas he to come to Moria. Together they led the Company back towards the mountains. The only road of old to Moria from the west had lain along the course of a stream, the Sirannon, that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors had stood. But either Gandalf was astray, or else the land had changed in recent years; for he did not strike the stream wherehelookedtofind it,onlyafewmilessouthwardsfrom their start. Themorningwaspassingtowardsnoon,andstillthe Com- pany wandered and scrambled in a barren country of red stones. Nowhere could they see any gleam of water or hear any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts sank. They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but whatthenightwouldbring,ifitcaughttheminthatlostland, none of them cared to think. Suddenly Gimli,whohadpressedonahead,calledbackto them. He was standing on a knoll and pointing to the right. Hurrying up they saw below them a deep and narrow chan- nel. It was empty and silent, and hardly a trickle of water flowed among the brown and red-stained stones of its bed;
392 the fellowship of the ring but on the near side there was a path, much broken and decayed, that wound its way among the ruined walls and paving-stones of an ancient highroad. ‘Ah! Here it is at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘This is where the stream ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has happened to the water, I cannot guess; it used tobeswiftandnoisy.Come!Wemusthurryon.Wearelate.’ The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged doggedly along the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned from the noon and began to go west. After abriefhaltandahastymealtheywentonagain.Beforethem the mountains frowned, but their path lay in a deep trough of land and they could see only the higher shoulders and the far eastward peaks. At length they came to a sharp bend. There the road, whichhadbeenveeringsouthwardsbetweenthebrinkofthe channel and a steep fall of the land to the left, turned and went due east again. Rounding the corner they saw before them a low cliff, some five fathoms high, with a broken and jagged top. Over it a trickling water dripped, through a wide cleft that seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had once been strong and full. ‘Indeed things have changed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no mistaking the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I remember right, there was a flight of steps cut in therockattheirside,butthemainroadwoundawayleftand climbed with several loops up to the level ground at the top. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right up to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it withtheroadbesideit.Letusgoandseewhatthingsarelike now!’ They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftly up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached the top they saw that they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up of the Gate-streamwasrevealed.Behindthemthesinking Sunfilled
a journey in the dark 393 the cool western sky with glimmering gold. Before them stretchedadarkstilllake.Neitherskynorsunsetwasreflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had been dammed and had filled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were reared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: finalandimpassable.Nosignofgateorentrance,notafissure or crack could Frodo see in the frowning stone. ‘There are the Walls of Moria,’ said Gandalf, pointing across the water. ‘And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door at the end of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None of the Company,Iguess,willwishtoswimthisgloomywateratthe end of the day. It has an unwholesome look.’ ‘Wemustfindawayroundthenorthernedge,’said Gimli. ‘The first thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the mainpathandseewherethatwillleadus.Eveniftherewere no lake, we could not get our baggage-pony up this stair.’ ‘But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,’ said Gandalf. ‘The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are places narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.’ ‘Poorold Bill!’said Frodo.‘Ihadnotthoughtofthat.And poor Sam! I wonder what he will say?’ ‘I am sorry,’ said Gandalf. ‘Poor Bill has been a useful companion, and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. Iwouldhavetravelledlighterandbroughtnoanimal,leastof allthisonethat Samisfondof,if Ihadhadmyway.Ifeared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.’ Thedaywasdrawingtoitsend,andcoldstarswereglinting in the sky high above the sunset, when the Company, with all the speed they could, climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked to be no more than twoorthreefurlongsatthewidestpoint.Howfaritstretched awaysouthwardtheycouldnotseeinthefailinglight;butits northern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and between the stony ridges that enclosed the valley
394 the fellowship of the ring and the water’s edge there was a rim of open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two to go before they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was making for; and then he had still to find the doors. When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake theyfoundanarrowcreekthatbarredtheirway.Itwasgreen and stagnant, thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclos- ing hills. Gimli strode forward undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at the edge. Behindhimtheywalkedinfile,threadingtheirwaywithcare, for under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy stones, and footing was treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust at the touch of the dark unclean water on his feet. As Sam,thelastofthe Company,led Billupontothedry ground on the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a fish had disturbed the still surface of the water. Turning quickly they saw ripples, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great rings were widening outwards from a point far out in the lake. There was a bub- bling noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the last gleams of the sunset were veiled in cloud. Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed as quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry land between the lake and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardlyadozenyardsacross,andencumberedwithfallenrock and stones; but they found a way, hugging the cliff, and keeping as far from the dark water as they might. A mile southwards along the shore they came upon holly trees. Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in the shallows, the remainsitseemedofoldthickets,orofahedgethathadonce linedtheroadacrossthedrownedvalley.Butcloseunderthe cliff there stood, still strong and living, two tall trees, larger thananytreesofhollythat Frodohadeverseenorimagined. Their great roots spread from the wall to the water. Under the looming cliffs they had looked like mere bushes, when seen far off from the top of the Stair; but now they towered overhead,stiff,dark,andsilent,throwingdeepnight-shadows
a journey in the dark 395 abouttheirfeet,standinglikesentinelpillarsattheendofthe road. ‘Well, here we are at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘Here the Elven- wayfrom Hollinended.Hollywasthetokenofthepeopleof that land, and they planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West-door was made chiefly for their use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those were happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.’ ‘It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned,’ said Gimli. ‘I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,’ said Legolas. ‘I have heard both,’ said Gandalf; ‘and I will not give judgement now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends, and to help me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find them the better. Night is at hand!’ Turning to the others he said: ‘While I am searching, will you each make ready to enter the Mines? For here I fear we mustsayfarewelltoourgoodbeastofburden.Youmustlay asidemuchofthestuffthatwebroughtagainstbitterweather: you will not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we come through and journey on down into the South. Instead each of us must take a share of what the pony carried, especially the food and the water-skins.’ ‘But you can’t leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place, Mr. Gandalf!’ cried Sam, angry and distressed. ‘I won’t have it, and that’s flat. After he has come so far and all!’ ‘I am sorry, Sam,’ said the wizard. ‘But when the Door opens Idonotthinkyouwillbeabletodragyour Billinside, intothelongdarkof Moria.Youwillhavetochoosebetween Bill and your master.’ ‘He’d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon’s den, if I led him,’ protested Sam. ‘It’d be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these wolves about.’
396 the fellowship of the ring ‘It will be short of murder, I hope,’ said Gandalf. He laid his hand on the pony’s head, and spoke in a low voice. ‘Go with words of guard and guiding on you,’ he said. ‘You are awisebeast,andhavelearnedmuchin Rivendell.Makeyour waystoplaceswhereyoucanfindgrass,andsocomeintime to Elrond’s house, or wherever you wish to go. ‘There,Sam!Hewillhavequiteasmuchchanceofescap- ing wolves and getting home as we have.’ Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill, seeming to understand well what was going on, nuzzled up to him, putting his nose to Sam’s ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled with the straps, unlading all the pony’s packs and throwing them on the ground. The others sorted out the goods, making a pile of all that could be left behind, and dividing up the rest. When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He appeared to have done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall of the cliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with his eyes. Gimli was wandering about,tappingthestonehereandtherewithhisaxe.Legolas was pressed against the rock, as if listening. ‘Well, here we are and all ready,’ said Merry; ‘but where are the Doors? I can’t see any sign of them.’ ‘Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,’ said Gimli.‘Theyareinvisible,andtheirownmakerscannotfind them or open them, if their secret is forgotten.’ ‘But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,’said Gandalf,comingsuddenlytolifeandturning round.‘Unlessthingsarealtogetherchanged,eyesthatknow what to look for may discover the signs.’ He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow ofthetreestherewasasmoothspace,andoverthishepassed hishandstoandfro,mutteringwordsunderhisbreath.Then he stepped back. ‘Look!’ he said. ‘Can you see anything now?’ The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but they could see nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the
a journey in the dark 397 surface, where the wizard’s hands had passed, faint lines appeared,likeslenderveinsofsilverrunninginthestone.At first they were no more than pale gossamer-threads, so fine thattheyonlytwinkledfitfullywherethe Mooncaughtthem, but steadily they grew broader and clearer, until their design could be guessed. At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of interlacing letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the threads were in places blurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and a hammer surmounted by a crown with seven stars. Beneath these again were two trees, each bearingcrescentmoons.Moreclearlythanallelsethereshone forth in the middle of the door a single star with many rays. ‘There are the emblems of Durin!’ cried Gimli. ‘And there is the Tree of the High Elves!’ said Legolas. ‘Andthe Starofthe Houseof Fe¨anor,’said Gandalf.‘They are wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moon- light, and sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is long since I heard them, and I thought deeply before I could recall them to my mind.’ ‘What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying todeciphertheinscriptiononthearch.‘Ithought Iknewthe elf-letters, but I cannot read these.’ ‘Thewordsareintheelven-tongueofthe Westof Middle- earthinthe Elder Days,’answered Gandalf.‘Buttheydonot sayanythingofimportancetous.Theysayonly:The Doorsof Durin,Lordof Moria.Speak,friend,andenter.Andunderneath small and faint is written: I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.’ ‘What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?’ asked Merry. ‘That is plain enough,’ said Gimli. ‘If you are a friend, speak the password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.’ ‘Yes,’said Gandalf,‘thesedoorsareprobablygovernedby words. Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or
398 the fellowship of the ring
a journey in the dark 399 forparticularpersons;andsomehavelocksandkeysthatare still needed when all necessary times and words are known. Thesedoorshavenokey.Inthedaysof Durintheywerenot secret.Theyusuallystoodopenanddoorwardssathere.But if they were shut, any who knew the opening word could speakitandpassin.Atleastsoitisrecorded,isitnot,Gimli?’ ‘It is,’ said the dwarf. ‘But what the word was is not remembered. Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.’ ‘But do not you know the word, Gandalf?’ asked Boromir in surprise. ‘No!’ said the wizard. The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf well, remained silent and unmoved. ‘Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?’ cried Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the dark water. ‘You told us that you had once passed through the Mines. How could that be, if you did not know how to enter?’ ‘Theanswertoyourfirstquestion,Boromir,’saidthewiz- ard, ‘is that I do not know the word – yet. But we shall soon see. And,’ he added, with a glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, ‘you may ask what is the use of my deeds whentheyareproveduseless.Asforyourotherquestion:do you doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left? I did not enter this way. I came from the East. ‘If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open outwards. From the inside you may thrust them open with your hands. From the outside nothing will move them save the spell of command. They cannot be forced inwards.’ ‘Whatareyougoingtodothen?’asked Pippin,undaunted by the wizard’s bristling brows. ‘Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,’ said Gandalf.‘Butifthatdoesnotshatterthem,and Iamallowed alittlepeacefromfoolishquestions,Iwillseekfortheopening words. ‘Ioncekneweveryspellinallthetonguesof Elvesor Men
400 the fellowship of the ring or Orcs, that was ever used for such a purpose. I can still remember ten score of them without searching in my mind. But only a few trials, I think, will be needed; and I shall not have to call on Gimli for words of the secret dwarf-tongue thattheyteachtonone.Theopeningwordswere Elvish,like the writing on the arch: that seems certain.’ He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff the silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil. Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen! Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen! he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but the blank grey stone did not stir. Many times he repeated these words in different order, or varied them. Then he tried other spells, one after another, speaking now faster and louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single words of Elvish speech. Nothing hap- pened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars were kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast. Again Gandalfapproachedthewall,andliftinguphisarms he spoke in tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and struck the rock with his staff. Open, open! he shouted, and followed it with the same command in every language that had ever been spoken in the West of Middle- earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground, and sat down in silence. Atthatmomentfromfaroffthewindboretotheirlistening ears the howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang to his side and whispered softly to him. ‘Donotlethimrunaway!’said Boromir.‘Itseemsthatwe shall need him still, if the wolves do not find us. How I hate this foul pool!’ He stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the dark water. Thestonevanishedwithasoftslap;butatthesameinstant
a journey in the dark 401 there was a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface out beyond where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly towards the foot of the cliff. ‘Why did you do that, Boromir?’ said Frodo. ‘I hate this place, too, and I am afraid. I don’t know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind the doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool. Don’t disturb it!’ ‘I wish we could get away!’ said Merry. ‘Why doesn’t Gandalf do something quick?’ said Pippin. Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head bowed,eitherindespairorinanxiousthought.Themournful howling of the wolves was heard again. The ripples on the water grew and came closer; some were already lapping on the shore. Withasuddennessthatstartledthemallthewizardsprang to his feet. He was laughing! ‘I have it!’ he cried. ‘Of course, of course! Absurdly simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.’ Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a clear voice: Mellon! The star shone out briefly and faded again. Then silently agreatdoorwaywasoutlined,thoughnotacrackorjointhad beenvisiblebefore.Slowlyitdividedinthemiddleandswung outwards inch by inch, until both doors lay back against the wall. Through the opening a shadowy stair could be seen climbingsteeplyup;butbeyondthelowerstepsthedarkness was deeper than the night. The Company stared in wonder. ‘Iwaswrongafterall,’said Gandalf,‘and Gimlitoo.Merry, of all people, was on the right track. The opening word was inscribedonthearchwayallthetime!Thetranslationshould have been: Say ‘‘Friend’’ and enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend and the doors opened. Quite simple. Toosimpleforalearnedlore-masterinthesesuspiciousdays. Those were happier times. Now let us go!’ He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. But at that moment several things happened. Frodo felt
402 the fellowship of the ring something seize him by the ankle, and he fell with a cry. Bill theponygaveawildneighoffear,andturnedtailanddashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped after him,andthenhearing Frodo’scryheranbackagain,weeping and cursing. The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host of snakes were swimming up from the southern end. Outfrom thewater along sinuoustentacle hadcrawled; it was pale-green and luminous and wet. Its fingered end had hold of Frodo’s foot, and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it with a knife. Thearmletgoof Frodo,and Sampulledhimaway,crying outforhelp.Twentyotherarmscameripplingout.Thedark water boiled, and there was a hideous stench. ‘Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick!’ shouted Gandalf leaping back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to the ground where they stood, he drove them forward. They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up, and Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed across the narrow shore and fin- gered the cliff-wall and the doors. One came wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned and paused. If he was considering what word would close the gateagainfromwithin,therewasnoneed.Manycoilingarms seized the doors on either side, and with horrible strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo they slammed, and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came dully through the ponderous stone. Sam,clingingto Frodo’sarm,collapsedonastepintheblack darkness.‘Poorold Bill!’hesaidinachokingvoice.‘Poorold Bill!Wolvesandsnakes!Butthesnakesweretoomuchforhim. Ihadtochoose,Mr.Frodo.Ihadtocomewithyou.’ Theyheard Gandalfgobackdownthestepsandthrusthis staff against the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, but the doors did not open. * * *
a journey in the dark 403 ‘Well, well!’ said the wizard. ‘The passage is blocked behind us now, and there is only one way out – on the other side of the mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders havebeenpiledup,andthetreesuprootedandthrownacross the gate. I am sorry; for the trees were beautiful, and had stood so long.’ ‘I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my foot first touched the water,’ said Frodo. ‘What was the thing, or were there many of them?’ ‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf; ‘but the arms were all guided by one purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark waters under the mountains. There are older and fouler things than Orcs in the deep places of the world.’ He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever it wasthatdweltinthelake,ithadseizedon Frodofirstamong all the Company. Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone magnified the sound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear: ‘In the deep places of the world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who will lead us now in this deadly dark?’ ‘Iwill,’said Gandalf,‘and Gimlishallwalkwithme.Follow my staff!’ As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held his staff aloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance. Thewidestairwaywassoundandundamaged.Twohundred steps they counted, broad and shallow; and at the top they foundanarchedpassagewithalevelfloorleadingonintothe dark. ‘Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing, since we can’t find a dining-room!’ said Frodo. He had begun to shake off the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt extremely hungry. The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the upper steps, dim figures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf gave them each a third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell.
404 the fellowship of the ring ‘It will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; ‘but I think we need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we havegreatluck,weshallneedallthatisleftbeforeweseethe other side! Go carefully with the water, too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines, but they should not be touched. We may not have a chance of filling our skins and bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.’ ‘How long is that going to take us?’ asked Frodo. ‘I cannot say,’ answered Gandalf. ‘It depends on many chances. But going straight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West-door to East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.’ After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All wereeagertogetthejourneyoverasquicklyaspossible,and were willing, tired as they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf walked in front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in the dim light as he turned his head from side to side. Behindthedwarfwalked Frodo, andhehaddrawntheshort sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or of Glamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs were near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and the young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked Aragorn. The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend. It went steadily down for a long while before it becamelevelonceagain.Theairgrewhotandstifling,butit wasnotfoul,andattimestheyfeltcurrentsofcoolerairupon their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings in the walls. There were many of these. In the pale ray of the wizard’s staff,Frodocaughtglimpsesofstairsandarches,andofother
a journey in the dark 405 passages and tunnels, sloping up, or running steeply down, or opening blankly dark on either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering. Gimliaided Gandalfverylittle,exceptbyhisstoutcourage. At least he was not, as were most of the others, troubled by the mere darkness in itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was doubtful; but it was always Gandalfwhohadthefinalword.The Minesof Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli, Glo´in’s son, dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey long before were now of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and hedidnotfalter,aslongastherewasapaththatledtowards his goal. ‘Donotbeafraid!’said Aragorn.Therewasapauselonger thanusual,and Gandalfand Gimliwerewhisperingtogether; the others were crowded behind, waiting anxiously. ‘Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a journey, if never on one so dark; and there are tales in Rivendell of greater deeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray – if there is any path to find. He has led us in here against our fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is surer of finding the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Beru´thiel.’ It was well for the Company that they had such a guide. They had no fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at the doors many things had been left behind. Butwithout anylight they wouldsoon havecome to grief.Therewerenotonlymanyroadstochoosefrom,there were also in many places holes and pitfalls, and dark wells beside the path in which their passing feet echoed. There were fissures and chasms in the walls and floor, and every nowandthenacrackwouldopenrightbeforetheirfeet.The widest was more than seven feet across, and it was long before Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over
406 the fellowship of the ring thedreadfulgap.Thenoiseofchurningwatercameupfrom far below, as if some great mill-wheel was turning in the depths. ‘Rope!’muttered Sam.‘Iknew I’dwantit,if Ihadn’tgotit!’ As these dangers became more frequent their march became slower. Already they seemed to have been tramping on, on, endlessly to the mountains’ roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort in the thought ofhaltinganywhere.Frodo’sspiritshadrisenforawhileafter his escape, and after food and a draught of the cordial; but now a deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept over him again. Though he had been healed in Rivendell of the knife- stroke, that grim wound had not been without effect. His senseswere sharperand moreawareof thingsthatcould not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could see more in the dark than any of his com- panions, save perhaps Gandalf. And he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain against his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He grippedtighteronthehiltofhisswordandwentondoggedly. The Companybehindhimspokeseldom,andthenonlyin hurriedwhispers.Therewasnosoundbutthesoundoftheir own feet: the dull stump of Gimli’s dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the light step of Legolas; the soft, scarce- heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear the slow firm footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they halted for a moment they heard nothing at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear, or to imagine that he heard, something else: like the faint fall of soft bare feet. It was never loud enough,ornearenough,forhimtofeelcertainthatheheard it;butonceithadstarteditneverstopped,whilethe Company was moving. But it was not an echo, for when they halted it patteredonforalittleallbyitself,andthengrewstill. * * *
a journey in the dark 407 It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. They had been going for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf came to his first serious check. Before him stoodawidedarkarchopeningintothreepassages:allledin thesamegeneraldirection,eastwards;buttheleft-handpass- ageplungeddown,whiletheright-handclimbedup,andthe middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow. ‘Ihavenomemoryofthisplaceatall!’said Gandalf,stand- ing uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of finding some marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind was to be seen. ‘I am too weary to decide,’ he said, shaking his head. ‘And I expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better halthereforwhatisleftofthenight.Youknowwhat Imean! In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and the middle-night has passed.’ ‘Poor old Bill!’ said Sam. ‘I wonder where he is. I hope those wolves haven’t got him yet.’ To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it was half closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed to lie a wide chamber cut in the rock. ‘Steady! Steady!’ cried Gandalf, as Merry and Pippin pushed forward, glad to find a place where they could rest withatleastmorefeelingofshelterthanintheopenpassage. ‘Steady! You do not know what is inside yet. I will go first.’ Hewentincautiously,andtheothersfiledbehind.‘There!’ he said, pointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. Before his feet they saw a large round hole like the mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at the edge and trailed down into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near. ‘One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you were going to strike the bottom,’ said Aragorn to Merry. ‘Let the guide go first while you have one.’ ‘This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of the three passages,’ said Gimli. ‘That hole was plainly a well for the guards’ use, covered with a stone lid.
408 the fellowship of the ring But the lid is broken, and we must all take care in the dark.’ Pippinfeltcuriouslyattractedbythewell.Whiletheothers were unrolling blanketsand making beds againstthe walls of the chamber, as far as possible from the hole in the floor, he crepttotheedgeandpeeredover.Achillairseemedtostrike his face, rising from invisible depths. Moved by a sudden impulse he groped for a loose stone, and let it drop. He felt his heart beatmany times before there was anysound. Then far below, as if the stone had fallen into deep water in some cavernousplace,therecameaplunk,verydistant,butmagni- fied and repeated in the hollow shaft. ‘What’sthat?’cried Gandalf.Hewasrelievedwhen Pippin confessed what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see his eye glinting. ‘Fool of a Took!’ he growled. ‘Thisisaseriousjourney,notahobbitwalking-party.Throw yourself in next time, and then you will be no further nuis- ance. Now be quiet!’ Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then there came out of the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and when the echoes had died away, they were repeated: tap-tom, tom-tap, tap-tap, tom. They sounded disquietingly like signals of some sort; but after a while the knocking died away and was not heard again. ‘That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,’ said Gimli. ‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I do not like it. It may have nothing to do with Peregrin’s foolish stone; but probably something has been disturbed that would have been better leftquiet.Pray,donothingofthekindagain!Letushopewe shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can go on the first watch, as a reward,’ he growled, as he rolled himself in a blanket. Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he kept on turning round, fearing that some unknown thing would crawl up out of the well. He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket, but he dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep.
a journey in the dark 409 Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was deep in thought, trying to recall every memory of his former journey in the Mines, and considering anxiously the next course that he should take; a false turn now might be disastrous. After an hour he rose up and came over to Pippin. ‘Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,’ he said in a kindlytone.‘Youwanttosleep,Iexpect.Icannotgetawink, so I may as well do the watching.’ ‘Iknowwhatisthematterwithme,’hemuttered,ashesat down by the door. ‘I need smoke! I have not tasted it since the morning before the snowstorm.’ The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a darkglimpseoftheoldwizardhuddledonthefloor,shielding a glowing chip in his gnarled hands between his knees. The flicker for a moment showed his sharp nose, and the puff of smoke. It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had satandwatchedallaloneforaboutsixhours,andhadletthe others rest. ‘And in the watches I have made up my mind,’ hesaid.‘Idonotlikethefeelofthemiddleway;and Idonot like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage. It is time we began to climb up again.’ For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they marched on; and they met no danger, and heard nothing, and saw nothing but the faint gleam of the wizard’s light, bobbinglikeawill-o’-the-wispinfrontofthem.Thepassage they had chosen wound steadily upwards. As far as they could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier and wider. There were now no openings to other galleries or tunnels on either side, and the floor was level and sound, without pits or cracks. Evidently they had struckwhatoncehadbeenanimportantroad;andtheywent forward quicker than they had done on their first march. Inthiswaytheyadvancedsomefifteenmiles,measuredin
410 the fellowship of the ring a direct line east, though they must have actually walked twentymilesormore.Astheroadclimbedupwards,Frodo’s spiritsrosealittle;buthestillfeltoppressed,andstillattimes he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the Company and beyond the fall and patter of their feet, a following foot- step that was not an echo. They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, and all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly the walls to right and left van- ished. They seemed to have passed through some arched doorway into a black and empty space. There was a great draught of warmer air behind them, and before them the darkness was cold on their faces. They halted and crowded anxiously together. Gandalf seemed pleased. ‘I chose the right way,’ he said. ‘Atlastwearecomingtothehabitableparts,and Iguessthat we are not far now from the eastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide hall. I will now risk a little real light.’ Heraisedhisstaff,andforabriefinstanttherewasablaze like a flash of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and fled, and for a second they saw a vast roof far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of stone. Before them andoneithersidestretchedahugeemptyhall;itsblackwalls, polished and smooth as glass, flashed and glittered. Three other entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straight beforethemeastwards,andoneoneitherside.Thenthelight went out. ‘That is all that I shall venture on for the present,’ said Gandalf. ‘There used to be great windows on the mountain- side, and shafts leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached them now, but it is night outside again, and we cannot tell until morning. If I amright,tomorrowwemayactuallyseethemorningpeeping in. But in the meanwhile we had better go no further. Let
a journey in the dark 411 us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through yet, and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the world.’ The Companyspentthatnightinthegreatcavernoushall, huddled close together in a corner to escape the draught: there seemed to be a steady inflow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about them as they lay hung the dark- ness, hollow and immense, and they were oppressed by the loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and endlessly branching stairs and passages. The wildest imaginings that darkrumourhadeversuggestedtothehobbitsfellaltogether short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria. ‘Theremusthavebeenamightycrowdofdwarveshereat one time,’ said Sam; ‘and every one of them busier than badgers for five hundred years to make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for? They didn’t live in these darksome holes surely?’ ‘These are not holes,’ said Gimli. ‘This is the great realm andcityofthe Dwarrowdelf.Andofolditwasnotdarksome, but full of light and splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.’ He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a deep voice, while the echoes ran away into the roof. The world was young, the mountains green, No stain yet on the Moon was seen, No words were laid on stream or stone When Durin woke and walked alone. He named the nameless hills and dells; He drank from yet untasted wells; He stooped and looked in Mirrormere, And saw a crown of stars appear, As gems upon a silver thread, Above the shadow of his head.
412 the fellowship of the ring The world was fair, the mountains tall, In Elder Days before the fall Of mighty kings in Nargothrond And Gondolin, who now beyond The Western Seas have passed away: The world was fair in Durin’s Day. A king he was on carven throne In many-pillared halls of stone With golden roof and silver floor, And runes of power upon the door. The light of sun and star and moon In shining lamps of crystal hewn Undimmed by cloud or shade of night There shone for ever fair and bright. There hammer on the anvil smote, There chisel clove, and graver wrote; There forged was blade, and bound was hilt; The delver mined, the mason built. There beryl, pearl, and opal pale, And metal wrought like fishes’ mail, Buckler and corslet, axe and sword, And shining spears were laid in hoard. Unwearied then were Durin’s folk; Beneath the mountains music woke: The harpers harped, the minstrels sang, And at the gates the trumpets rang. The world is grey, the mountains old, The forge’s fire is ashen-cold; No harp is wrung, no hammer falls: The darkness dwells in Durin’s halls; The shadow lies upon his tomb In Moria, in Khazad-duˆm. But still the sunken stars appear
a journey in the dark 413 In dark and windless Mirrormere; There lies his crown in water deep, Till Durin wakes again from sleep. ‘I like that!’ said Sam. ‘I should like to learn it. In Moria, in Khazad-duˆm! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinkingofallthoselamps.Aretherepilesofjewelsandgold lying about here still?’ Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more. ‘Piles of jewels?’ said Gandalf. ‘No. The Orcs have often plundered Moria;thereisnothingleftintheupperhalls.And since the dwarves fled, no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuriesdowninthedeepplaces:theyaredrownedinwater – or in a shadow of fear.’ ‘Thenwhatdothedwarveswanttocomebackfor?’asked Sam. ‘Formithril,’answered Gandalf.‘Thewealthof Moriawas not in gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, theirservant.Suchthingstheyfoundhere,itistrue,especially iron; but they did not need to delve for them: all things that they desired they could obtain in traffic. For here alone in theworldwasfound Moria-silver,ortrue-silverassomehave called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times that of gold,andnowitisbeyondprice;forlittleisleftaboveground, and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes lead away north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The Dwarves tell no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their wealth, so also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too deep, and disturbed that from which they fled, Durin’s Bane. Of what they brought to light the Orcs have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute to Sauron, who covets it. ‘Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, and polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet harder than tempered steel. Its beauty
414 the fellowship of the ring was like to that of common silver, but the beauty of mithril did not tarnish or grow dim. The Elves dearly loved it, and among many uses they made of it ithildin, starmoon, which you saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathom-house, I suppose.’ ‘What?’ cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. ‘A corslet of Moria-silver? That was a kingly gift!’ ‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I never told him, but its worth was greaterthanthevalueofthewhole Shireandeverythinginit.’ Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt no doubt that Bilbo knew quite well. It was indeed a kingly gift. But nowhisthoughtshadbeencarriedawayfromthedark Mines, to Rivendell,to Bilbo,andto Bag Endinthedayswhile Bilbo was still there. He wished with all his heart that he was back there, and in those days, mowing the lawn, or pottering amongtheflowers,andthathehadneverheardof Moria,or mithril – or the Ring. Adeepsilencefell.Onebyonetheothersfellasleep.Frodo was on guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors out of deep places, dread came over him. His hands were cold and his brow damp. He listened. All his mind was given to listening and nothing else for two slow hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall. Hiswatchwasnearlyover,when,faroffwhereheguessed that the western archway stood, he fancied that he could see twopalepointsoflight,almostlikeluminouseyes.Hestarted. His head had nodded. ‘I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard,’ he thought. ‘I was on the edge of a dream.’ He stood upandrubbedhiseyes,andremainedstanding,peeringinto the dark, until he was relieved by Legolas.
a journey in the dark 415 Whenhe laydown hequicklywent tosleep,but itseemed to him that the dream went on: he heard whispers, and saw the two pale points of light approaching, slowly. He woke andfoundthattheotherswerespeakingsoftlynearhim,and that a dim light was falling on his face. High up above the eastern archway through a shaft near the roof came a long pale gleam; and across the hall through the northern arch light also glimmered faint and distantly. Frodosatup.‘Goodmorning!’said Gandalf.‘Formorning it is again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side of Moria. Before today is over we ought to find the Great Gates and see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.’ ‘I shall be glad,’ said Gimli. ‘I have looked on Moria, and it is very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.’ Aftertheyhadbreakfasted Gandalfdecidedtogoonagain at once. ‘We are tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,’ he said. ‘I think that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.’ ‘No indeed!’ said Boromir. ‘Which way shall we take? Yonder eastward arch?’ ‘Maybe,’ said Gandalf. ‘But I do not know yet exactly where we are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are aboveandtothenorthofthe Great Gates;anditmaynotbe easy to find the right road down to them. The eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but beforewemakeupourmindsweoughttolookaboutus.Let us go towards that light in the north door. If we could find a window it would help, but I fear that the light comes only down deep shafts.’ Followinghisleadthe Companypassedunderthenorthern arch.Theyfoundthemselvesinawidecorridor.Astheywent alongittheglimmergrewstronger,andtheysawthatitcame throughadoorwayontheirright.Itwashighandflat-topped,
416 the fellowship of the ring and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standing half open.Beyonditwasalargesquarechamber.Itwasdimlylit, but to their eyes, after so long a time in the dark, it seemed dazzlingly bright, and they blinked as they entered. Their feet disturbed a deep dust upon the floor, and stumbled among things lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at first make out. The chamber was lit by a wideshafthighinthefurthereasternwall;itslantedupwards and, far above, a small square patch of blue sky could be seen. The light of the shaft fell directly on a table in the middle of the room: a single oblong block, about two feet high, upon which was laid a great slab of white stone. ‘It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards withacurioussenseofforeboding,tolookmorecloselyatit. Gandalf came quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven:
a journey in the dark 417 ‘These are Daeron’s Runes, such as were used of old in Moria,’ said Gandalf. ‘Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves: balin son of fundin lord of moria.’ ‘He is dead then,’ said Frodo. ‘I feared it was so.’ Gimli cast his hood over his face.
Chapter 5 THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUˆ M The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin. Frodo thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and of Balin’s visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the mountains it seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world. At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search for anything that would give them tidings of Balin’s fate, or showwhathadbecomeofhisfolk.Therewasanothersmaller door on the other side of the chamber, under the shaft. By both the doors they could now see that many bones were lying, and among them were broken swords and axe-heads, and cloven shields and helms. Some of the swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades. Thereweremanyrecessescutintherockofthewalls,and in them were large iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and plundered; but beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been slashed and stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained with black and other dark marks like old blood that little of it could be read. Gandalf lifted it carefully, but the leaves cracked and broke as he laid it on the slab. He pored over it for some time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli stand- ing at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they were written by many different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale, and here and there in Elvish script. At last Gandalf looked up. ‘It seems to be a record of the fortunes of Balin’s folk,’ he said. ‘I guess that it began with their coming to Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the pagesseemtohavenumbersreferringtotheyearsaftertheir
the bridge of khazad-duˆm 419 arrival. The top page is marked one – three, so at least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this! ‘We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard – I think; thenextwordisblurredandburned:probablyroom–weslew manyinthebright–Ithink–suninthedale.Flo´iwaskilledby an arrow. He slew the great. Then there is a blur followed by Flo´i under grass near Mirror mere. The next line or two I cannot read. Then comes We have taken the twentyfirst hall of North end to dwell in. There is I cannot read what. A shaft ismentioned.Then Balinhassetuphisseatinthe Chamberof Mazarbul.’ ‘The Chamber of Records,’ said Gimli. ‘I guess that is where we now stand.’ ‘Well, I can read no more for a long way,’ said Gandalf, ‘except the word gold, and Durin’s Axe and something helm. Then Balinisnowlordof Moria.Thatseemstoendachapter. Aftersomestarsanotherhandbegins,and Icanseewefound truesilver, and later the word wellforged, and then something, Ihaveit!mithril;andthelasttwolines O´intoseekfortheupper armouries of Third Deep, something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin gate.’ Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. ‘There are several pages of the same sort, rather hastily written and muchdamaged,’hesaid;‘but Icanmakelittleoftheminthis light.Nowtheremustbeanumberofleavesmissing,because they begin to be numbered five, the fifth year of the colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I cannot read them. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish script.’ ‘That would be Ori’s hand,’ said Gimli, looking over the wizard’s arm. ‘He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish characters.’ ‘I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,’ said Gandalf. ‘The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followedbydaybeingthetenthofnovembre Balinlordof Moria
420 the fellowship of the ring fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to look in Mirror mere. an orcshothimfrombehindastone.weslewtheorc,butmanymore ... up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the page issoblurredthat Icanhardlymakeanythingout,but Ithink I can read we have barred the gates, and then can hold them long if, and then perhaps horrible and suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have kept the title that he took for less than five years. I wonder what happened afterwards; but there is no timeto puzzleout thelast fewpages.Here isthe lastpage of all.’ He paused and sighed. ‘It is grim reading,’ he said. ‘I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second hall. Fra´r and Lo´ni and Na´li fell there. Then there are four lines smeared so that I can only read went 5 days ago. The last lines run the pool is up to the wall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took O´in. We cannot get out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the deep. I wonderwhatthatmeans.Thelastthingwrittenisinatrailing scrawl of elf-letters: they are coming. There is nothing more.’ Gandalf paused and stood in silent thought. A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Company. ‘We cannot get out,’ muttered Gimli. ‘It was well for us that the pool had sunk a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end.’ Gandalf raised his head and looked round. ‘They seem to have made a last stand by both doors,’ he said; ‘but there were not many left by that time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria!Itwasvaliantbutfoolish.Thetimeisnotcome yet.Now,Ifear,wemustsayfarewellto Balinsonof Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take this book,the Bookof Mazarbul,andlookatitmorecloselylater. You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back to Da´in, if you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grieve him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.’ ‘Which way shall we go?’ asked Boromir. ‘Back to the hall,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But our visit to this room has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This
the bridge of khazad-duˆm 421 must be, as Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hallmustbethetwenty-firstofthe North-end.Thereforewe should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear right andsouth,andgodownwards.The Twenty-first Hallshould be on the Seventh Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!’ Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came agreatnoise:arolling Boomthatseemedtocomefromdepths far below, and to tremble in the stone at their feet. They sprangtowardsthedoorinalarm.Doom,doomitrolledagain, asifhugehandswereturningtheverycavernsof Moriaintoa vastdrum.Thentherecameanechoingblast:agreathornwas blown in the hall, and answering horns and harsh cries were heardfurtheroff.Therewasahurryingsoundofmanyfeet. ‘They are coming!’ cried Legolas. ‘We cannot get out,’ said Gimli. ‘Trapped!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Why did I delay? Here we are, caught,justastheywerebefore.But Iwasnotherethen.We will see what——’ Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook. ‘Slam the doors and wedge them!’ shouted Aragorn. ‘And keep your packs on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our way out yet.’ ‘No!’ said Gandalf. ‘We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.’ Anotherharshhorn-callandshrillcriesrangout.Feetwere coming down the corridor. There was a ring and clatter as the Company drew their swords. Glamdring shone with a pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges. Boromir set his shoulder against the western door. ‘Wait a moment! Do not close it yet!’ said Gandalf. He sprang forward to Boromir’s side and drew himself upto his full height. ‘Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria?’ he cried in a loud voice. There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding
422 the fellowship of the ring stones into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised incommand.Doom,boom,doomwentthedrumsinthedeep. With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the nar- row opening of the door and thrust forward his staff. There was a dazzling flash that lit the chamber and the passage outside.Foraninstantthewizardlookedout.Arrowswhined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back. ‘There are Orcs, very many of them,’ he said. ‘And some are large and evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but there is something else there. A great cave-troll, I think, or more than one. There is no hope of escape that way.’ ‘Andnohopeatall,iftheycomeattheotherdooraswell,’ said Boromir. ‘There is no sound outside here yet,’ said Aragorn, who was standing by the eastern door listening. ‘The passage on thissideplungesstraightdownastair:itplainlydoesnotlead back towards the hall. But it is no good flying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind. We cannot block the door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it opens inwards. We must do something to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber of Mazarbul!’ he said grimly, feeling the edge of his sword, Andu´ril. Heavyfeetwereheardinthecorridor.Boromirflunghim- selfagainstthedoorandheaveditto;thenhewedgeditwith broken sword-blades and splinters of wood. The Company retreated to the other side of the chamber. But they had no chance to fly yet. There was a blow on the door that made it quiver; and then it began to grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A huge arm and shoulder, with a dark skin of greenish scales, was thrust through the widening gap. Then a great, flat, toeless foot was forced through below. There was a dead silence outside. Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might; but his sword rang, glanced aside, and fell from his shaken hand. The blade was notched.
the bridge of khazad-duˆm 423 Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath blaze up in his heart. ‘The Shire!’ he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped, and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot jerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo’s arm. Black drops dripped from the blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir hurled himself against the door and slammed it again. ‘One for the Shire!’ cried Aragorn. ‘The hobbit’s bite is deep! You have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo!’ There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after crash.Ramsandhammerswerebeatingagainstit.Itcracked and staggered back, and the opening grew suddenly wide. Arrows came whistling in, but struck the northern wall, and fellharmlesslytothefloor.Therewasahorn-blastandarush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber. Howmanytherewerethe Companycouldnotcount.The affraywassharp,buttheorcsweredismayedbythefierceness of the defence. Legolas shot two through the throat. Gimli hewed the legs from under another that had sprung up on Balin’s tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thir- teen had fallen the rest fled shrieking, leaving the defenders unharmed,exceptfor Samwhohadascratchalongthescalp. A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled his orc: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A fire was smouldering inhisbrowneyesthatwouldhavemade Ted Sandymanstep backwards, if he had seen it. ‘Now is the time!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Let us go, before the troll returns!’ But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had reached the stair outside, a huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black mail from head to foot, leaped into thechamber; behindhim hisfollowers clusteredinthe door- way. His broad flat face was swart, his eyes were like coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a great spear. With a thrustofhishugehideshieldheturned Boromir’sswordand bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving under Aragorn’s blow with the speed of a striking snake he
424 the fellowship of the ring charged into the Company and thrust with his spear straight at Frodo. The blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo was hurled against the wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the spear-shaft, and it broke. But even as the orc flungdownthetruncheonandsweptouthisscimitar,Andu´ril came down upon his helm. There was a flash like flame and the helm burst asunder. The orc fell with cloven head. His followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them. Doom, doom went the drums in the deep. The great voice rolled out again. ‘Now!’ shouted Gandalf. ‘Now is the last chance. Run for it!’ Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and madeforthestair,pushing Merryand Pippininfrontofhim. The others followed; but Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas:inspiteoftheperilhelingeredby Balin’stombwith hisheadbowed.Boromirhauledtheeasterndoorto,grinding upon its hinges: it had great iron rings on either side, but could not be fastened. ‘I am all right,’ gasped Frodo. ‘I can walk. Put me down!’ Aragorn nearly dropped him inhis amazement. ‘I thought you were dead!’ he cried. ‘Not yet!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no time for wonder. Off you go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose paths leading right and downwards.’ ‘Wecannotleaveyoutoholdthedooralone!’said Aragorn. ‘Do as I say!’ said Gandalf fiercely. ‘Swords are no more use here. Go!’ Thepassagewaslitbynoshaftandwasutterlydark.They gropedtheirwaydownalongflightofsteps,andthenlooked back;buttheycouldseenothing,excepthighabovethemthe faint glimmer of the wizard’s staff. He seemed to be still standingonguardbythecloseddoor.Frodobreathedheavily
the bridge of khazad-duˆm 425 and leaned against Sam, who put his arms about him. They stood peering up the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear the voice of Gandalf above, muttering words thatrandowntheslopingroofwithasighingecho.Hecould not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be trembling. Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom, doom. Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white light. Then there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats broke out wildly: doom-boom, doom-boom, and thenstopped.Gandalfcameflyingdownthestepsandfellto the ground in the midst of the Company. ‘Well, well! That’s over!’ said the wizard struggling to his feet. ‘I have done all that I could. But I have met my match, and have nearly been destroyed. But don’t stand here! Go on! You will have to do without light for a while: I am rather shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are you, Gimli? Come ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!’ They stumbled after him wondering what had happened. Doom, doom went the drum-beats again: they now sounded muffledandfaraway,buttheywerefollowing.Therewasno other sound of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor any voice. Gandalf took no turns, right or left, for the passage seemed to be going in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended a flight of steps, fifty or more, to a lower level. At the moment that was their chief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they came on it and put their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the ground with his staff like a blind man. At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, and had descended many flights of stairs. There was still no sound of pursuit. Almost they began to hope that they would escape. At the bottom of the seventh flight Gandalf halted. ‘Itisgettinghot!’hegasped.‘Weoughttobedownatleast to the level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look
426 the fellowship of the ring for a left-hand turn to take us east. I hope it is not far. I am very weary. I must rest here a moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.’ Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the step. ‘What happened away up there at the door?’ he asked. ‘Did you meet the beater of the drums?’ ‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I found myself suddenly faced by something that I have not met before. I couldthinkofnothingtodobuttotryandputashutting-spell on the door. I know many; but to do things of that kind rightly requires time, and even then the door can be broken by strength. ‘As Istood there I couldhear orc-voices onthe other side: at any moment I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear what was said; they seemed to be talking in their own hideous language. All I caught was ghaˆsh: that is ‘‘fire’’. Then something came into the chamber – I felt it through the door, and the orcs themselves were afraid and fell silent. Itlaidholdoftheironring,andthenitperceivedmeandmy spell. ‘What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a challenge.Thecounter-spellwasterrible.Itnearlybrokeme. For an instant the door left my control and began to open! I had to speak a word of Command. That proved too great a strain. The door burst in pieces. Something dark as a cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown back- wards down the stairs. All the wall gave way, and the roof of the chamber as well, I think. ‘I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something else isburied theretoo. I cannotsay. Butat least thepassage behind us was completely blocked. Ah! I have never felt so spent, but it is passing. And now what about you, Frodo? There was not time to say so, but I have never been more delightedinmylifethanwhenyouspoke.Ifearedthatitwas a brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.’ ‘What about me?’ said Frodo. ‘I am alive, and whole I think. I am bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.’
the bridge of khazad-duˆm 427 ‘Well,’said Aragorn,‘Ican onlysaythat hobbitsaremade of a stuff so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I known, I would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree! That spear-thrust would have skewered a wild boar!’ ‘Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo; ‘though Ifeelasif Ihadbeencaughtbetweenahammerand an anvil.’ He said no more. He found breathing painful. ‘You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘There is more about you than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if the remark meant more than it said. They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He had keen eyes in the dark. ‘I think,’ he said, ‘that there is a light ahead. But it is not daylight. It is red. What can it be?’ ‘Ghaˆsh!’ muttered Gandalf. ‘I wonder if that is what they meant: that the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.’ Soonthelightbecameunmistakable,andcouldbeseenby all.It wasflickering andglowing onthewalls awaydown the passagebefore them.Theycould nowseetheir way:infront the road sloped down swiftly, and some way ahead there stoodalowarchway;throughitthegrowinglightcame.The air became very hot. Whentheycametothearch Gandalfwentthrough,signing to them to wait. As he stood just beyond the opening they saw his face lit by a red glow. Quickly he stepped back. ‘There is some new devilry here,’ he said, ‘devised for our welcome, no doubt. But I know now where we are: we have reached the First Deep, the level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and the Gates are near: away beyond the eastern end, on the left, not more than a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, up a broad stair, alongawideroad,throughthe First Hall,andout!Butcome and look!’ Theypeeredout.Beforethemwasanothercavernoushall. It was loftier and far longer than the one in which they had slept. They were near its eastern end; westward it ran away
428 the fellowship of the ring intodarkness.Downthecentrestalkedadoublelineoftower- ingpillars.Theywerecarvedlikebolesofmightytreeswhose boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems were smooth and black, but a red glow was darklymirroredintheirsides.Rightacrossthefloor,closeto the feet of two huge pillars a great fissure had opened. Out ofitafierceredlightcame,andnowandagainflameslicked atthebrinkandcurledaboutthebasesofthecolumns.Wisps of dark smoke wavered in the hot air. ‘If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we should have been trapped here,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let ushopethatthefirenowliesbetweenusandpursuit.Come! There is no time to lose.’ Evenashespoketheyheardagainthepursuingdrum-beat: Doom,doom,doom.Awaybeyondtheshadowsatthewestern end of the hall there came cries and horn-calls. Doom, doom: the pillars seemed to tremble and the flames to quiver. ‘Now for the last race!’ said Gandalf. ‘If the sun is shining outside, we may still escape. After me!’ Heturnedleftandspedacrossthesmoothfloorofthehall. Thedistancewasgreaterthanithadlooked.Astheyranthey heard the beat and echo of many hurrying feet behind. A shrillyellwentup:theyhadbeenseen.Therewasaringand clash of steel. An arrow whistled over Frodo’s head. Boromirlaughed.‘Theydidnotexpectthis,’hesaid.‘The fire has cut them off. We are on the wrong side!’ ‘Look ahead!’ called Gandalf. ‘The Bridge is near. lt is dangerous and narrow.’ Suddenly Frodosawbeforehimablackchasm.Attheend of the hall the floor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door could onlybe reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the chasm with one curving spring of fifty feet. It was an ancient defence of the Dwarvesagainstanyenemythatmightcapturethe First Hall and the outer passages. They could only pass across it in single file. At the brink Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind.
the bridge of khazad-duˆm 429 ‘Lead the way, Gimli!’ he said. ‘Pippin and Merry next. Straight on, and up the stair beyond the door!’ Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang back. Another pierced Gandalf’s hat and stuck there like a black feather. Frodo looked behind. Beyond the fire he saw swarmingblackfigures:thereseemedtobehundredsoforcs. They brandished spears and scimitars which shone red as blood in the firelight. Doom, doom rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and louder, doom, doom. Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it wasalongshotforhissmallbow.Hedrew,buthishandfell, andthearrowslippedtotheground.Hegaveacryofdismay and fear. Two great trolls appeared; they bore great slabs of stone, and flung them down to serve as gangways over the fire.Butitwasnotthetrollsthathadfilledthe Elfwithterror. The ranks of the orcs had opened, and they crowded away, as if they themselves were afraid. Something was coming up behind them. What it was could not be seen: it was like a great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, of man-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to be in it and to go before it. It came to the edge of the fire and the light faded as if a cloud had bent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across the fissure.Theflamesroareduptogreetit,andwreathedabout it; and a black smoke swirled in the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand was a blade likeastabbingtongueoffire;initsleftitheldawhipofmany thongs. ‘Ai! ai!’ wailed Legolas. ‘A Balrog! A Balrog is come!’ Gimli stared with wide eyes. ‘Durin’s Bane!’ he cried, and letting his axe fall he covered his face. ‘A Balrog,’ muttered Gandalf. ‘Now I understand.’ He falteredandleanedheavilyonhisstaff.‘Whatanevilfortune! And I am already weary.’ The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards them. The orcs yelled and poured over the stone gangways. Then
430 the fellowship of the ring Boromir raised his horn and blew. Loud the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout of many throats under the cavernous roof. For a moment the orcs quailed and the fiery shadow halted. Then the echoes died as suddenly as a flame blown out by a dark wind, and the enemy advanced again. ‘Over the bridge!’ cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. ‘Fly!Thisisafoebeyondanyofyou.Imustholdthenarrow way. Fly!’Aragorn and Boromirdid not heedthe command, but still held their ground, side by side, behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others halted just within the doorway at the hall’s end, and turned, unable to leave their leader to face the enemy alone. The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the span, leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand Glamdring gleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow about it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the thongs whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But Gandalf stood firm. ‘Youcannotpass,’hesaid.Theorcsstoodstill,andadead silence fell. ‘I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. You cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Uduˆn. Go back to the Shadow! You cannot pass.’ The Balrog made no answer. The fire in it seemed to die, but the darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to the bridge, and suddenly it drew itself up to a great height, and its wings were spread from wall to wall; but still Gandalf could be seen, glimmering in the gloom; he seemed small, andaltogetheralone:greyandbent,likeawizenedtreebefore the onset of a storm. From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming. Glamdring glittered white in answer. There was a ringing clash and a stab of white fire. The Balrog fell back, and its sword flew up in molten fragments. The wizard swayed on the bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still.
the bridge of khazad-duˆm 431 ‘You cannot pass!’ he said. With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its whip whirled and hissed. ‘He cannot stand alone!’ cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the bridge. ‘Elendil!’ he shouted. ‘I am with you, Gandalf!’ ‘Gondor!’ cried Boromir and leaped after him. At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud hesmotethebridgebeforehim.Thestaffbrokeasunderand fell from his hand. A blinding sheet of white flame sprang up. The bridge cracked. Right at the Balrog’s feet it broke, andthestoneuponwhichitstoodcrashedintothegulf,while the rest remained, poised, quivering like a tongue of rock thrust out into emptiness. With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow plunged down and vanished. But even as it fell it swung its whip, and the thongs lashed and curled about the wizard’s knees, dragging him to the brink. He staggered and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid into the abyss. ‘Fly, you fools!’ he cried, and was gone. Thefireswentout,andblankdarknessfell.The Company stoodrootedwithhorrorstaringintothepit.Evenas Aragorn and Boromircameflyingback,therestofthebridgecracked and fell. With a cry Aragorn roused them. ‘Come! I will lead you now!’ he called. ‘We must obey his last command. Follow me!’ They stumbled wildlyup the great stairsbeyond the door, Aragorn leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage. Along this they fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that he himself was weeping as he ran. Doom, doom, doom the drum-beats rolled behind, mournful now and slow; doom! They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the roof. They ran swifter. They passed into a hall, bright with daylight from its high windows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors they passed,
432 the fellowship of the ring and suddenly before them the Great Gates opened, an arch of blazing light. Therewasaguardoforcscrouchingintheshadowsbehind the great door-posts towering on either side, but the gates were shattered and cast down. Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that stood in his path, and the rest fled in terror of his wrath. The Company swept past them and took no heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down the huge and age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria. Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind on their faces. They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the walls.Dimrill Dalelayaboutthem.Theshadowofthe Misty Mountainslayuponit,buteastwardstherewasagoldenlight on the land. It was but one hour after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were white and high. Theylookedback.Darkyawned thearchwayofthe Gates underthemountain-shadow.Faintandfarbeneaththeearth rolled theslow drum-beats:doom. Athin blacksmoke trailed out. Nothing else was to be seen; the dale all around was empty. Doom. Grief at last wholly overcame them, and they wept long: some standing and silent, some cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. The drum-beats faded.
Chapter 6 LOTHLO´ RIEN ‘Alas! I fear we cannot stay here longer,’ said Aragorn. He looked towards the mountains and held up his sword. ‘Fare- well, Gandalf!’ he cried. ‘Did I not say toyou: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware? Alas that I spoke true! What hope have we without you?’ He turned to the Company. ‘We must do without hope,’ hesaid.‘Atleastwemayyetbeavenged.Letusgirdourselves and weep no more! Come! We have a long road, and much to do.’ Theyroseandlookedaboutthem.Northwardthedaleran up into a glen of shadows between two great arms of the mountains, above which three white peaks were shining: Celebdil,Fanuidhol,Caradhras,the Mountainsof Moria.At the head of the glen a torrent flowed like a white lace over an endless ladder of short falls, and a mist of foam hung in the air about the mountains’ feet. ‘Yonderis the Dimrill Stair,’ said Aragorn,pointing tothe falls. ‘Down the deep-cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should have come, if fortune had been kinder.’ ‘Or Caradhras less cruel,’ said Gimli. ‘There he stands smiling in the sun!’ He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks and turned away. Totheeasttheoutflungarmofthemountainsmarchedto a sudden end, and far lands could be descried beyond them, wide and vague. To the south the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than a mile away, and a little below them, for they still stood high up on the west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a great spear-head thrust deep into the northern glen;butitssouthernendwasbeyondtheshadowsunderthe
434 the fellowship of the ring sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue like clear evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was still and unruffled.Aboutitlayasmoothsward,shelvingdownonall sides to its bare unbroken rim. ‘There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zaˆram!’ said Gimli sadly. ‘I remember that he said: ‘‘May you have joy of the sight! But we cannot linger there.’’ Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again. It is I that must hasten away, and he that must remain.’ The Company now went down the road from the Gates. It was rough and broken, fading to a winding track between heather and whin that thrust amid the cracking stones. But stillitcouldbeseenthatoncelongagoagreatpavedwayhad woundupwardsfromthelowlandstothe Dwarf-kingdom.In places there were ruined works of stone beside the path, and mounds of green topped with slender birches, or fir-trees sighing in the wind. An eastward bend led them hard by the sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the roadside stood a single column broken at the top. ‘Thatis Durin’s Stone!’cried Gimli.‘Icannotpasswithout turningasideforamomenttolookatthewonderofthedale!’ ‘Be swift then!’ said Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.‘The Sunsinksearly.The Orcswillnot,maybe,come out till after dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost spent, and it will be dark tonight.’ ‘Come with me, Frodo!’ cried the dwarf, springing from the road. ‘I would not have you go without seeing Kheled- zaˆram.’ He ran down the long green slope. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue water in spite of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind. Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It was cracked and weather-worn, and the faint runes upon its side could not be read. ‘This pillar marks the spot where Durinfirstlookedinthe Mirrormere,’saidthedwarf.‘Letus look ourselves once, ere we go!’ They stooped over the dark water. At first they could see
lothlo´rien 435 nothing. Then slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profound blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white flame above them; beyond there was a spaceofsky.Therelikejewelssunkinthedeepshoneglinting stars, though sunlight was in the sky above. Of their own stooping forms no shadow could be seen. ‘O Kheled-zaˆram fair and wonderful!’ said Gimli. ‘There lies the Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell!’ He bowed, and turned away, and hastened back up the greensward to the road again. ‘What did you see?’ said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too deep in thought to answer. Theroadnowturnedsouthandwentquicklydownwards, running out from between the arms of the dale. Some way below the mere they came on a deep well of water, clear as crystal, from which a freshet fell over a stone lip and ran glistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel. ‘Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises,’ said Gimli. ‘Do not drink of it! It is icy cold.’ ‘Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many other mountain-streams,’ said Aragorn. ‘Our road leads beside it for many miles. For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and first I hope to come to the woods where the Silverlode flows into the Great River – out yonder.’ They looked as he pointed, and before them they couldseethestreamleapingdowntothetroughofthevalley, and then running on and away into the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden haze. ‘There lie the woods of Lothlo´rien!’ said Legolas. ‘That is the fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no treeslikethetreesofthatland.Forintheautumntheirleaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do they fall, and then the boughs are laden with yellow flowers; and thefloor of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars are of silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood
436 the fellowship of the ring say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime!’ ‘My heart will be glad, even in the winter,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it lies many miles away. Let us hasten!’ For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the others; but Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, andafterawhiletheylaggedbehind.Theyhadeatennothing sincethe earlymorning.Sam’s cutwasburning likefire,and hisheadfeltlight.Inspiteoftheshiningsunthewindseemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt every step more painful and he gasped for breath. At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, he spoke to Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to come with him. ‘Iamsorry,Frodo!’hecried,fullofconcern.‘Somuchhas happened this day and we have such need of haste, that I haveforgotten thatyou werehurt; and Sam too.You should havespoken.Wehavedonenothingtoeaseyou,asweought, though all the orcs of Moria were after us. Come now! A little further on there is a place where we can rest for a little. There I will do what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.’ Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran down from the west, and joined its bubbling water with the hurrying Silverlode. Together they plunged over a fall of green-hued stone, and foamed down into a dell. About it stood fir-trees, short and bent, and its sides were steep and clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of whortle-berry. At the bottom there was a level space through which the streamflowednoisilyovershiningpebbles.Heretheyrested. Itwasnownearlythreehoursafternoon,andtheyhadcome only a few miles from the Gates. Already the sun was westering. While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of brush- and fir-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam’s wound was not deep, but it looked ugly,
lothlo´rien 437 and Aragorn’s face was grave as he examined it. After a moment he looked up with relief. ‘Goodluck,Sam!’hesaid.‘Manyhavereceivedworsethan this in payment for the slaying of their first orc. The cut is not poisoned, as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should heal well when I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.’ He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. ‘They are dry, and some of their virtue has gone,’ he said, ‘but here I have still some of the leaves of athelas that I gatherednear Weathertop.Crushoneinthewater,andwash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn, Frodo!’ ‘I am all right,’ said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched. ‘All I needed was some food and a little rest.’ ‘No!’ said Aragorn. ‘We must have a look and see what the hammer and the anvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at all.’ Gently he stripped off Frodo’s old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before his eyes like the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it off and held it up, and the gems on it glittered like stars, and the sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in a pool. ‘Look, my friends!’ he called. ‘Here’s a pretty hobbit-skin to wrap an elven-princeling in! If it were known that hobbits had such hides, all the hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.’ ‘And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain,’ said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. ‘It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given!’ ‘Ihaveoftenwonderedwhatyouand Bilboweredoing,so close in his little room,’ said Merry. ‘Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever. I hope we get a chance of telling him about it!’
438 the fellowship of the ring There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo’s right side and breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather,butatonepointtheringshadbeendriventhroughit into the flesh. Frodo’s left side also was scored and bruised where he had been hurled against the wall. While the others set the food ready, Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas was steeped. The pungent fragrance filled the dell, and all those who stooped over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the pain leave him, and his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore to the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side. ‘The mail is marvellously light,’ he said. ‘Put it on again, if you can bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat. Do not lay it aside, even in sleep, unless fortune bringsyouwhereyouaresafeforawhile;andthatwillseldom chance while your quest lasts.’ When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They put out the fire and hid all traces of it. Then climbing outofthedelltheytooktotheroadagain.Theyhadnotgone farbeforethesunsankbehindthewestwardheightsandgreat shadows crept down the mountain-sides. Dusk veiled their feet, and mist rose in the hollows. Away in the east the evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and Frodo now feeling eased and greatly refreshed were able to go at a fair pace, and with only one briefhalt Aragornledthe Companyonfornearlythreemore hours. Itwasdark.Deepnighthadfallen.Thereweremanyclear stars, but the fast-waning moon would not be seen till late. Gimli and Frodo were at the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for any sound upon the road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence. ‘Not a sound but thewind,’ he said. ‘There are no goblins near,ormyearsaremadeofwood.Itistobehopedthatthe Orcswillbecontentwithdrivingusfrom Moria.Andmaybe
lothlo´rien 439 that was all their purpose, and they had nothing else to do with us – with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foes for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.’ Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade wasdull.Yethehadheardsomething,orthoughthehad.As soon as the shadows had fallen about them and the road behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two tiny gleams of light behind, or for a moment he thought he saw them, but at once they slipped aside and vanished. ‘What is it?’ said the dwarf. ‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I thought I heard feet, and I thought I saw a light – like eyes. I have thought so often, since we first entered Moria.’ Gimli halted and stooped to the ground. ‘I hear nothing butthenight-speechofplantandstone,’hesaid.‘Come!Let us hurry! The others are out of sight.’ The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them. Before them a wide grey shadow loomed, and they heard an endless rustle of leaves like poplars in the breeze. ‘Lothlo´rien!’ cried Legolas. ‘Lothlo´rien! We have come to the eaves of the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter!’ Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the road and stream that ran suddenly beneath their spreading boughs. In the dim light of the stars their stems were grey, and their quivering leaves a hint of fallow gold. ‘Lothlo´rien!’ said Aragorn. ‘Glad I am to hear again the wind in the trees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can go no further. Here let us hope thatthevirtueofthe Elveswillkeepustonightfromtheperil that comes behind.’ ‘If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,’ said Gimli. ‘It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land whence we wandered in ages long ago,’
440 the fellowship of the ring said Legolas, ‘but we hear that Lo´rien is not yet deserted, for there is a secret power here that holds evil from the land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe they dwell now deep in the woods and far from the northern border.’ ‘Indeed deep in the wood they dwell,’ said Aragorn, and sighed as if some memory stirred in him. ‘We must fend for ourselves tonight. We will go forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and then we will turn aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.’ He stepped forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did not follow. ‘Is there no other way?’ he said. ‘What other fairer way would you desire?’ said Aragorn. ‘A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,’ said Boromir. ‘By strange paths has this Company been led, and so far to evil fortune. Against my will we passed under theshadesof Moria,toourloss.Andnowwemustenterthe Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard in Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few none have escaped unscathed.’ ‘Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will speak the truth,’ said Aragorn. ‘But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of those who once were wise they now speak evil of Lothlo´rien. Believe what you will, there is no other way for us – unless you would go back to Moria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or swim the Great River all alone.’ ‘Then lead on!’ said Boromir. ‘But it is perilous.’ ‘Perilousindeed,’said Aragorn,‘fairandperilous;butonly evil need fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me!’ Theyhadgonelittlemorethanamileintotheforestwhen they came upon another stream flowing down swiftly from the tree-clad slopes that climbed back westward towards the mountains. They heard it splashing over a fall away among theshadowsontheirright.Itsdarkhurryingwatersranacross
lothlo´rien 441 the path before them, and joined the Silverlode in a swirl of dim pools among the roots of trees. ‘Hereis Nimrodel!’said Legolas.‘Ofthisstreamthe Silvan Elves made many songs long ago, and still we sing them in the North, remembering the rainbow on its falls, and the golden flowers that floated in its foam. All is dark now and the Bridgeof Nimrodel isbrokendown.Iwillbathe myfeet, for it is said that the water is healing to the weary.’ He went forwardandclimbeddownthedeep-clovenbankandstepped into the stream. ‘Followme!’hecried.‘Thewaterisnotdeep.Letuswade across! On the further bank we can rest, and the sound of the falling water may bring us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.’ Onebyonetheyclimbeddownandfollowed Legolas.For a moment Frodo stood near the brink and let the water flow overhistiredfeet.Itwascoldbutitstouchwasclean,andas he went on and it mounted to his knees,he felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs. When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested andatealittlefood;and Legolastoldthemtalesof Lothlo´rien that the Elves of Mirkwood still kept in their hearts, of sun- light and starlight upon the meadows by the Great River before the world was grey. At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the waterfall running sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he could hear a voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water. ‘Doyouhearthevoiceof Nimrodel?’asked Legolas.‘Iwill sing you asong of the maiden Nimrodel, whobore the same name as the stream beside which she lived long ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this is how it runs in the Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.’ In a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them he began:
442 the fellowship of the ring An Elven-maid there was of old, A shining star by day: Her mantle white was hemmed with gold, Her shoes of silver-grey. A star was bound upon her brows, A light was on her hair As sun upon the golden boughs In Lo´rien the fair. Her hair was long, her limbs were white, And fair she was and free; And in the wind she went as light As leaf of linden-tree. Beside the falls of Nimrodel, By water clear and cool, Her voice as falling silver fell Into the shining pool. Where now she wanders none can tell, In sunlight or in shade; For lost of yore was Nimrodel And in the mountains strayed. The elven-ship in haven grey Beneath the mountain-lee Awaited her for many a day Beside the roaring sea. A wind by night in Northern lands Arose, and loud it cried, And drove the ship from elven-strands Across the streaming tide.
lothlo´rien 443 When dawn came dim the land was lost, The mountains sinking grey Beyond the heaving waves that tossed Their plumes of blinding spray. Amroth beheld the fading shore Now low beyond the swell, And cursed the faithless ship that bore Him far from Nimrodel. Of old he was an Elven-king, A lord of tree and glen, When golden were the boughs in spring In fair Lothlo´rien. From helm to sea they saw him leap, As arrow from the string, And dive into the water deep, As mew upon the wing. The wind was in his flowing hair, The foam about him shone; Afar they saw him strong and fair Go riding like a swan. But from the West has come no word, And on the Hither Shore No tidings Elven-folk have heard Of Amroth evermore. Thevoiceof Legolasfaltered,andthesongceased.‘Ican- not sing any more,’ he said. ‘That is but a part, for I have forgotten much. It is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow came upon Lothlo´rien, Lo´rien of the Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.’ ‘But the Dwarves did not make the evil,’ said Gimli. ‘Isaidnotso;yetevilcame,’answered Legolassadly.‘Then
444 the fellowship of the ring many of the Elves of Nimrodel’s kindred left their dwellings anddeparted,andshewaslostfarinthe South,inthepasses ofthe White Mountains;andshecamenottotheshipwhere Amroth her lover waited for her. But in the spring when the wind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be heard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind is inthe Souththevoiceof Amrothcomesupfromthesea;for Nimrodelflowsinto Silverlode,that Elvescall Celebrant,and Celebrant into Anduin the Great, and Anduin flows into the Bay of Belfalas whence the Elves of Lo´rien set sail. But neither Nimrodel nor Amroth came ever back. ‘It is told that she had a house built in the branches of a tree that grew near the falls; for that was the custom of the Elves of Lo´rien, to dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Therefore they were called the Galadhrim, the Tree-people. Deep in their forest the trees are very great. The people of the woods did not delve in the ground like Dwarves, nor build strong places of stone before the Shadow came.’ ‘And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be thought safer than sitting on the ground,’ said Gimli. He looked across the stream to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then up into the roof of dark boughs above. ‘Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,’ said Aragorn. ‘We cannot build a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek refuge in the tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside the road already longer than was wise.’ The Company now turned aside from the path, and went into the shadow of the deeper woods, westward along the mountain-streamawayfrom Silverlode.Notfarfromthefalls of Nimrodel they found a cluster of trees, some of which overhungthestream.Theirgreatgreytrunkswereofmighty girth, but their height could not be guessed. ‘I will climb up,’ said Legolas. ‘I am at home among trees, by root or bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a name in song. Mellyrn they are called, and are thosethatbear theyellowblossom,but Ihaveneverclimbed
lothlo´rien 445 inone.Iwillseenowwhatistheirshapeandwayofgrowth.’ ‘Whateveritmaybe,’said Pippin,‘theywillbemarvellous treesindeediftheycanofferanyrestatnight,excepttobirds. I cannot sleep on a perch!’ ‘Thendigaholeintheground,’said Legolas,‘ifthatismore afterthefashionofyourkind.Butyoumustdigswiftanddeep, ifyouwishtohidefrom Orcs.’Hespranglightlyupfromthe ground and caught a branch that grew from the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for a moment, a voicespokesuddenlyfromthetree-shadowsabovehim. ‘Daro!’ it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped backtoearthinsurpriseandfear.Heshrankagainstthebole of the tree. ‘Stand still!’ he whispered to the others. ‘Do not move or speak!’ There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and then another clear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what was said, for the speech that the Silvanfolkeastofthemountainsusedamongthemselves wasunlikethatofthe West.Legolaslookedupandanswered in the same language.* ‘Who are they, and what do they say?’ asked Merry. ‘They’re Elves,’ said Sam. ‘Can’t you hear their voices?’ ‘Yes, they are Elves,’ said Legolas; ‘and they say that you breathe so loud that they could shoot you in the dark.’ Sam hastily put his hand over his mouth. ‘But they say also that you need have no fear. They have been aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and knewthat Iwasoneoftheir Northernkindred,andtherefore they did not hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me climb up with Frodo; for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey. The others they ask to wait a little, and to keep watch at the foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.’ * * * * Seenotein Appendix F:Ofthe Elves.
446 the fellowship of the ring Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of rope, silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender it proved strong enough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly up, and Frodo followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches of the mallorn-tree grew out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown of many boughs, and among these they found that there had been built a wooden platform, or flet as such things were called in those days: the Elves called it a talan. It wasreachedbyaroundholeinthecentrethroughwhichthe ladder passed. When Frodocameatlastupontotheflethefound Legolas seated with three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy- grey, and could not be seen among the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of them uncovered a small lamp that gave out a slender silver beam. He held it up, looking at Frodo’s face, and Sam’s. Then he shut off the light again, and spoke words of welcome in his elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in return. ‘Welcome!’ the Elf then said again in the Common Lan- guage, speaking slowly. ‘We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heart of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings with any other folk. Even our own kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there are someof usstill whogo abroadforthe gatheringof newsand the watching of our enemies, and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my name. My brothers, Ru´mil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue. ‘Butwehaveheardrumoursofyourcoming,forthemess- engersof Elrondpassedby Lo´rienontheirwayhomeupthe Dimrill Stair.Wehadnotheardof–hobbits,ofhalflings,for many a long year, and did not know that any yet dwelt in Middle-earth.Youdonotlookevil!Andsinceyoucomewith an Elfofourkindred,wearewillingtobefriendyou,as Elrond asked; though it is not our custom to lead strangers through ourland.Butyoumuststayheretonight.Howmanyareyou?’
lothlo´rien 447 ‘Eight,’ said Legolas. ‘Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom, Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.’ ‘Thenameof Aragornsonof Arathornisknownin Lo´rien,’ said Haldir, ‘and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is well. But you have yet spoken only of seven.’ ‘The eighth is a dwarf,’ said Legolas. ‘A dwarf!’ said Haldir. ‘That is not well. We have not had dealings with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in our land. I cannot allow him to pass.’ ‘Butheisfromthe Lonely Mountain,oneof Da´in’strusty people, and friendly to Elrond,’ said Frodo. ‘Elrond himself chose him to be one of our companions, and he has been brave and faithful.’ The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned Legolas in their own tongue. ‘Very good,’ said Haldir at last. ‘We will do this, though it is against our liking. If Aragorn and Legolas will guard him, and answer for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlo´rien. ‘But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not remain on the ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a great troop of Orcs going north towards Moria,alongtheskirtsofthemountains,manydays ago. Wolves are howling on the wood’s borders. If you have indeed come from Moria, the peril cannot be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go on. ‘The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us – we do not fear them! There is another talan in the next tree. There the others must take refuge. You, Legolas, must answertousforthem.Callus,ifanythingisamiss!Andhave an eye on that dwarf!’ Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir’s message; and soon afterwards Merry and Pippin clambered up on to the high flet. They were out of breath and seemed rather scared. ‘There!’ said Merry panting. ‘We have lugged up your
448 the fellowship of the ring blankets as well as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of our baggage in a deep drift of leaves.’ ‘You had no need of your burdens,’ said Haldir. ‘It is cold in the tree-tops in winter, though the wind tonight is in the South;butwehavefoodanddrinktogiveyouthatwilldrive away the night-chill, and we have skins and cloaks to spare.’ The hobbits accepted this second (and far better) supper verygladly.Thentheywrappedthemselveswarmly,notonly in the fur-cloaks of the Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and tried to go to sleep. But weary as they were only Sam found that easy to do. Hobbits do not like heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The fletwasnotatalltotheirlikingasabedroom.Ithadnowalls, not even a rail; only on one side was there a light plaited screen, which could be moved and fixed in different places according to the wind. Pippin went on talking for a while. ‘I hope, if I do go to sleep in this bird-loft, that I shan’t roll off,’ he said. ‘Once I do get to sleep,’ said Sam, ‘I shall go on sleeping, whether Irollofforno.Andthelesssaid,thesooner I’lldrop off, if you take my meaning.’ Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars glinting through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at hisside long before he himself closedhis eyes. He coulddimlyseethegreyformsoftwoelvessittingmotionless with their arms about their knees, speaking in whispers. The otherhadgonedowntotakeuphiswatchononeofthelower branches.Atlastlulledbythewindintheboughsabove,and the sweet murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below, Frodo fell asleep with the song of Legolas running in his mind. Late in the night he woke. The other hobbits were asleep. The Elves were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly amongtheleaves.Thewindwasstill.Alittlewayoffheheard a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on the ground below. There was a ring of metal. The sounds died slowly away, and seemed to go southward, on into the wood.
lothlo´rien 449 A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. Frodosatupinalarmandsawthatitwasagrey-hooded Elf. He looked towards the hobbits. ‘What is it?’ said Frodo. ‘Yrch!’ saidthe Elf ina hissing whisper,and cast onto the flet the rope-ladder rolled up. ‘Orcs!’ said Frodo. ‘What are they doing?’ But the Elf had gone. There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, and the very falls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shiv- ered in his wraps. He was thankful that they had not been caught on the ground; but he felt that the trees offered little protection,exceptconcealment.Orcswereaskeenashounds on a scent, it was said, but they could also climb. He drew out Sting: it flashed and glittered like a blue flame; and then slowlyfadedagainandgrewdull.Inspiteofthefadingofhis sword the feeling of immediate danger did not leave Frodo, ratheritgrewstronger.Hegotupandcrawledtotheopening and peered down. He was almost certain that he could hear stealthy movements at the tree’s foot far below. Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless in their movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like sniffing; and something seemed to be scrabbling on the bark of the tree-trunk. He stared down into the dark, holding his breath. Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came like a soft hissing through closed teeth. Then coming up, close to the stem, Frodo saw two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they turned away, andashadowyfigureslippedroundthetrunkofthetreeand vanished. Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly up through the branches.‘There was something inthis tree that I have never seen before,’ he said. ‘It was not an orc. It fled assoonas Itouchedthetree-stem.Itseemedtobewary,and to have some skill in trees, or I might have thought that it was one of you hobbits.
450 the fellowship of the ring ‘Ididnotshoot,for Idarednotarouseanycries:wecannot risk battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossedthe Nimrodel–cursetheirfoulfeetinitscleanwater! – and went on down the old road beside the river. They seemedtopickupsomescent,andtheysearchedtheground for a while near the place where you halted. The three of us could not challenge a hundred, so we went ahead and spoke with feigned voices, leading them on into the wood. ‘Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to warn our people. None of the Orcs will ever return out of Lo´rien.Andtherewillbemany Elveshiddenonthenorthern borderbeforeanothernightfalls.Butyoumusttaketheroad south as soon as it is fully light.’ Day came pale from the East. As the light grew it filtered through the yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to thehobbitsthattheearlysunofacoolsummer’smorningwas shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the moving branches. Looking through an opening on the south side of the flet Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying like a sea of fallow gold tossing gently in the breeze. Themorningwasstillyoungandcoldwhenthe Company set out again, guided now by Haldir and his brother Ru´mil. ‘Farewell,sweet Nimrodel!’cried Legolas.Frodolookedback andcaughtagleamofwhitefoamamongthegreytree-stems. ‘Farewell,’ he said. It seemed to him that he would never hear again a running water so beautiful, for ever blending its innumerable notes in an endless changeful music. They went back to the path that still went on along the west side of the Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There were the prints of orc-feet in the earth. Butsoon Haldirturnedasideintothetreesandhaltedonthe bank of the river under their shadows. ‘There is one of my people yonder across the stream,’ he said, ‘though you may not see him.’ He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out of a thicket of young trees an Elf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood thrown back; his
lothlo´rien 451 hairglintedlikegoldinthemorningsun.Haldirskilfullycast over the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and bound the end about a tree near the bank. ‘Celebrantisalreadyastrongstreamhere,asyousee,’said Haldir,‘anditrunsbothswiftanddeep,andisverycold.We donotsetfootinitsofarnorth,unlesswemust.Butinthese days of watchfulness we do not make bridges. This is how wecross!Followme!’Hemadehisendoftheropefastabout another tree, and then ran lightly along it, over the river and back again, as if he were on a road. ‘I can walk this path,’ said Legolas; ‘but the others have not this skill. Must they swim?’ ‘No!’said Haldir.‘Wehavetwomoreropes.Wewillfasten them above the other, one shoulder-high, and another half- high, and holding these the strangers should be able to cross with care.’ When this slender bridge had been made, the Company passed over, some cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Ofthehobbits Pippinprovedthebestforhewassure-footed, andhewalkedoverquickly,holdingonlywithonehand;but he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Sam shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into thepaleeddyingwaterasifitwasachasminthemountains. He breathed with relief when he was safely across. ‘Live and learn! as my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking ofgardening,notofroostinglikeabird,noroftryingtowalk like a spider. Not even my uncle Andy ever did a trick like that!’ When at length all the Company was gathered on the east bank of the Silverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and coiled two of them. Ru´mil, who had remained on the other side, drew back the last one, slung it on his shoulder, and with a waveofhishandwentaway,backto Nimrodeltokeepwatch. ‘Now,friends,’said Haldir,‘youhaveenteredthe Naithof Lo´rien, or the Gore, as you would say, for it is the land that lies like a spearhead between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great. We allow no strangers to spy out the
452 the fellowship of the ring secrets of the Naith. Few indeed are permitted even to set foot there. ‘Aswasagreed,Ishallhereblindfoldtheeyesof Gimlithe Dwarf. The others may walk free for a while, until we come nearertoourdwellings,downin Egladil,inthe Anglebetween the waters.’ Thiswasnotatalltothelikingof Gimli.‘Theagreementwas madewithoutmyconsent,’hesaid.‘Iwillnotwalkblindfold, likeabeggaroraprisoner.And Iamnospy.Myfolkhavenever had dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy. Neither havewedoneharmtothe Elves.Iamnomorelikelytobetray youthan Legolas,oranyotherofmycompanions.’ ‘Idonotdoubtyou,’said Haldir.‘Yetthisisourlaw.Iam notthemasterofthelaw,andcannotsetitaside.Ihavedone much in letting you set foot over Celebrant.’ Gimli was obstinate. He planted his feet firmly apart, and laidhishanduponthehaftofhisaxe.‘Iwillgoforwardfree,’ he said, ‘or I will go back and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of word, though I perish alone in the wilderness.’ ‘You cannot go back,’ said Haldir sternly. ‘Now you have comethusfar,you mustbebroughtbeforethe Lord andthe Lady.Theyshalljudgeyou,toholdyouortogiveyouleave, as they will. You cannot cross the rivers again, and behind youthere arenow secretsentinels thatyou cannotpass. You would be slain before you saw them.’ Gimlidrewhisaxefromhisbelt.Haldirandhiscompanion benttheirbows.‘Aplagueon Dwarvesandtheirstiffnecks!’ said Legolas. ‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘If I am still to lead this Company, you must do as I bid. It is hard upon the Dwarf to be thus singled out. We will all be blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make the journey slow and dull.’ Gimli laughed suddenly. ‘A merry troop of fools we shall look! Will Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one dog? But I will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.’
lothlo´rien 453 ‘I am an Elf and a kinsman here,’ said Legolas, becoming angry in his turn. ‘Now let us cry: ‘‘a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!’’’ said Aragorn. ‘But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes, Haldir!’ ‘I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do not lead us well,’ said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes. ‘Youwillhavenoclaim,’said Haldir.‘Ishallleadyouwell, and the paths are smooth and straight.’ ‘Alasforthefollyofthesedays!’said Legolas.‘Hereallare enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry in the woodland under leaves of gold!’ ‘Folly it may seem,’ said Haldir. ‘Indeed in nothing is the power of the Dark Lord more clearly shown than in the estrangementthatdividesallthose whostillopposehim.Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in the world beyond Lothlo´rien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not by ourowntrustendangerourland.Welivenowuponanisland amid many perils, and our hands are more often upon the bowstring than upon the harp. ‘Theriverslongdefendedus,buttheyareasureguardno more;forthe Shadowhascreptnorthwardallaboutus.Some speakofdeparting,yetforthatitalreadyseemstoolate.The mountains to the west are growing evil; to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron’s creatures; and it is rumoured that we cannot now safely pass southward through Rohan, andthemouthsofthe Great Riverarewatchedbythe Enemy. Even if we could come to the shores of the Sea, we should find no longer any shelter there. It is said that there are still havens of the High Elves, but they are far north and west, beyond the land of the Halflings. But where that may be, though the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.’ ‘You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,’ said Merry. ‘There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire, where Hobbits live.’ ‘Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the
454 the fellowship of the ring sea!’ said Haldir. ‘It is long indeed since any of my folk have lookedonit,yetstillwerememberitinsong.Tellmeofthese havens as we walk.’ ‘I cannot,’ said Merry. ‘I have never seen them. I have never been out of my own land before. And if I had known what the world outside was like, I don’t think I should have had the heart to leave it.’ ‘Not even to see fair Lothlo´rien?’ said Haldir. ‘The world is indeed full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; butstillthereismuchthatisfair,andthoughinalllandslove is now mingled with grief, it grows perhaps the greater. ‘Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will draw back, and peace shall come again. Yet I do not believe that the world about us will ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun as it was aforetime. For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass to the Seaunhinderedandleavethe Middle-earthforever.Alasfor Lothlo´rienthat Ilove!Itwouldbeapoorlifeinalandwhere no mallorn grew. But if there are mallorn-trees beyond the Great Sea, none have reported it.’ As they spoke thus, the Company filed slowly along the paths in the wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground beneath their feet smooth and soft, and after a while they walked more freely, without fear of hurt or fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo found his hearingandothersensessharpened.Hecouldsmellthetrees and the trodden grass. He could hear many different notes in the rustle of the leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on his right, and the thin clear voices of birds high in the sky. He felt the sun upon his face and hands when they passed through an open glade. As soon as he set foot upon the far bank of Silverlode a strange feeling had come upon him, and it deepened as he walked on into the Naith: it seemed to him that he had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of the Elder Days, and was now walking in a world that was no more. In Rivendell there was memory of ancient things; in Lo´rien the
lothlo´rien 455 ancient things still lived on in the waking world. Evil had beenseenandheardthere,sorrowhadbeenknown;the Elves fearedanddistrustedtheworldoutside:wolveswerehowling on the wood’s borders: but on the land of Lo´rien no shadow lay. All that day the Company marched on, until they felt the cooleveningcomeandheardtheearlynight-windwhispering among many leaves. Then they rested and slept without fear upon the ground; for their guides would not permit them to unbind their eyes, and they could not climb. In the morning they went on again, walking without haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo was aware that they had passed out under theshining Sun.Suddenlyheheardthesoundofmanyvoices all around him. A marching host of Elves had come up silently: they were hastening towards the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they brought news, some of which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs had been waylaid and almostalldestroyed;theremnanthadfledwestwardtowards the mountains, and were being pursued. A strange creature also had been seen, running with bent back and with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet not of beast-shape. It had eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not knowing whether it was good or ill, and it had vanished down the Silverlode southward. ‘Also,’said Haldir,‘theybringmeamessagefromthe Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even thedwarf Gimli.Itseemsthatthe Ladyknowswhoandwhat iseachmemberofyour Company.Newmessageshavecome from Rivendell perhaps.’ He removed the bandage first from Gimli’s eyes. ‘Your pardon!’ he said, bowing low. ‘Look on us now with friendly eyes! Look and be glad, for you are the first dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith of Lo´rien since Durin’s Day!’ When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up andcaughthisbreath.Theywerestandinginanopenspace.
456 the fellowship of the ring To the left stood a great mound, covered with a sward of grass as green as Springtime in the Elder Days. Upon it, as adouble crown,grewtwocircles oftrees:theouter hadbark of snowy white, and were leafless but beautiful in their shapely nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees of great height, still arrayed in pale gold. High amid the branches of a towering tree that stood in the centre of all there gleamed a white flet. At the feet of the trees, and all about the green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden flowers shaped like stars. Among them, nodding on slender stalks, were other flowers, white and palest green: they glimmered as a mist amid the rich hue of the grass. Over all the sky was blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the hill and cast long green shadows beneath the trees. ‘Behold!Youarecometo Cerin Amroth,’said Haldir.‘For this is the heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and hereisthemoundof Amroth,whereinhappierdayshishigh house was built. Here ever bloom the winter flowers in the unfadinggrass:theyellowelanor,andthepaleniphredil.Here we will stay awhile, and come to the city of the Galadhrim at dusk.’ The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass, but Frodo stood awhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to him that he had stepped through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A light was upon it for which his language had no name. All that he saw was shapely, but the shapes seemed at once clear cut, as if they had been first conceived and drawn at the uncovering of his eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for ever. He saw no colour but those he knew,goldandwhiteandblueandgreen,buttheywerefresh and poignant, as if he had at that moment first perceived themandmadeforthemnamesnewandwonderful.Inwinter here no heart could mourn for summer or for spring. No blemish or sickness or deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On the land of Lo´rien there was no stain.
lothlo´rien 457 Heturnedandsawthat Samwasnowstandingbesidehim, looking round with a puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as if he was not sure that he was awake. ‘It’s sunlight and bright day, right enough,’ he said. ‘I thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more Elvish than anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside a song, if you take my meaning.’ Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaningofboththoughtandword.Hesmiled.‘Youfeelthe power of the Lady of the Galadhrim,’ he said. ‘Would it please you to climb with me up Cerin Amroth?’ They followed him as he stepped lightly up the grass-clad slopes.Thoughhewalkedandbreathed,andabouthimliving leaves and flowers were stirred by the same cool wind as fannedhisface,Frodofeltthathewasinatimelesslandthat did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When he had gone and passed again into the outer world, still Frodo thewandererfromthe Shirewouldwalkthere,uponthegrass among elanor and niphredil in fair Lothlo´rien. They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the South Windblewupon Cerin Amrothandsighedamongthe branches. Frodo stood still, hearing far off great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away, and sea-birds crying whose race had perished from the earth. Haldirhadgoneonandwasnowclimbingtothehighflet. As Frodo prepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon the tree beside the ladder: never before had he been so suddenly and so keenly aware of the feel and texture of a tree’s skin and of the life within it. He felt a delight in wood and the touch of it, neither as forester nor as carpenter; it was the delight of the living tree itself. As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his hand and turned him towards the South. ‘Look this way first!’ he said. Frodolookedandsaw,stillatsomedistance,ahillofmany mightytrees,oracityofgreentowers:whichitwashecould not tell. Out of it, it seemed to him that the power and light
458 the fellowship of the ring came that held all the land in sway. He longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the green city. Then he looked east- wardandsawallthelandof Lo´rienrunningdowntothepale gleam of Anduin, the Great River. He lifted his eyes across the river and all the light went out, and he was back again in the world he knew. Beyond the river the land appeared flat and empty, formless and vague, until far away it rose again like a wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on Lothlo´rien had no power to enlighten the shadow of that distant height. ‘There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,’ said Haldir. ‘Itis cladin aforest ofdark fir,where the treesstrive oneagainstanotherandtheirbranchesrotandwither.Inthe midst upon a stony height stands Dol Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is inhabitedagain,andwithpowersevenfold.Ablackcloudlies often over it of late. In this high place you may see the two powers thatare opposed one toanother; and everthey strive nowinthought,butwhereasthelightperceivestheveryheart of the darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. Not yet.’Heturnedandclimbedswiftlydown,andtheyfollowed him. At the hill’s foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as a tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as Frodo looked at him he knew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For the grim years were removed from the face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed in white, a young lord tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue to one whom Frodo could not see. Arwen vanimelda, nama´rie¨! he said, and then hedrew abreath,andreturning outofhisthought helooked at Frodo and smiled. ‘Hereistheheartof Elvendomonearth,’hesaid,‘andhere my heart dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that we still must tread, you and I. Come with me!’ And taking Frodo’s hand in his, he left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man.
Chapter 7 THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL Thesunwassinkingbehindthemountains,andtheshadows were deepening in the woods, when they went on again. Their paths now went into thickets where the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps. Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves under a pale evening sky pricked by a few early stars. There was a wide treeless space before them, running in a great circle and bending away on either hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its brink was green, as if it glowed still in memory of the sun that had gone. Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen in all the land. Their height could not be guessed, but they stood up in the twilight like living towers. In their many-tiered branches and amid their ever-moving leaves countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and silver. Haldir turned towards the Company. ‘Welcometo Caras Galadhon!’hesaid.‘Hereisthecityof the Galadhrimwheredwellthe Lord Celebornand Galadriel the Lady of Lo´rien. But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not look northward. We must go round to the southern side, and the way is not short, for the city is great.’ There was a road paved with white stone running on the outerbrinkofthefosse.Alongthistheywentwestward,with the city ever climbing up like a green cloud upon their left; and as the night deepened more lights sprang forth, until all the hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last to a white
460 the fellowship of the ring bridge, and crossing found the great gates of the city: they faced south-west, set between the ends of the encircling wall thathereoverlapped,andtheyweretallandstrong,andhung with many lamps. Haldir knocked and spoke, and the gates opened sound- lessly; but of guards Frodo could see no sign. The travellers passedwithin,andthegatesshutbehindthem.Theywerein adeeplanebetweentheendsofthewall,andpassingquickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could they see, nor hear any feet upon the paths; but there were many voices, about them, and in the air above. Far away up on the hill they could hear the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves. They went along many paths and climbed many stairs, untiltheycametothehighplacesandsawbeforethemamid awidelawnafountainshimmering.Itwaslitbysilverlamps that swung from the boughs of trees, and it fell into a basin of silver, from which a white stream spilled. Upon the south side of the lawn there stood the mightiest of all the trees; its great smooth bole gleamed like grey silk, and up it towered, until its first branches, far above, opened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves. Beside it a broad white ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were seated. They sprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that theyweretallandcladingreymail,andfromtheirshoulders hung long white cloaks. ‘Heredwell Celebornand Galadriel,’said Haldir.‘Itistheir wish that you should ascend and speak with them.’ One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn, and it was answered three times from far above. ‘I will go first,’ said Haldir. ‘Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may follow as they wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs, but you may rest upon the way.’ As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, some on another, and some set about the bole
the mirror of galadriel 461 ofthetree,sothattheladderpassedthroughthem.Atagreat height above the ground he came to a wide talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that almost it would have served for a hall of Men upon the earth. He entered behind Haldir, and found that he was in a chamber of oval shape, in the midst of which grew the trunk ofthegreatmallorn,nowtaperingtowardsitscrown,andyet making still a pillar of wide girth. The chamber was filled with a soft light; its walls were greenandsilveranditsroofofgold.Many Elveswereseated there.Ontwochairsbeneaththeboleofthetreeandcanopied by a living bough there sat, side by side, Celeborn and Galadriel. They stood up to greet their guests, after the manner of Elves, even those who were accounted mighty kings. Very tall they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave and beautiful. They were clad wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold, and the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright; but no sign of age was upon them, unless it were in the depths of their eyes; for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the wells of deep memory. Haldirled Frodobeforethem,andthe Lordwelcomedhim in his own tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon his face. ‘Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire!’ said Cele- born. ‘When all have come we will speak together.’ Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name astheyentered.‘Welcome Aragornsonof Arathorn!’hesaid. ‘It is eight and thirty years of the world outside since you came to this land; and those years lie heavy on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for a while!’ ‘Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from the North.’ ‘Welcome Gimli son of Glo´in! It is long indeed since we saw one of Durin’s folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our long law. May it be a sign that though the
462 the fellowship of the ring worldisnowdarkbetterdaysareathand,andthatfriendship shall be renewed between our peoples.’ Gimli bowed low. When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked at them again. ‘Here there are eight,’ he said. ‘Nine were to set out: so said the messages. But maybe there has beensomechangeofcounselthatwehavenotheard.Elrond isfaraway,anddarknessgathersbetweenus,andallthisyear the shadows have grown longer.’ ‘Nay, there was no change of counsel,’ said the Lady Galadriel,speakingforthefirsttime.Hervoicewasclearand musical, but deeper than woman’s wont. ‘Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass the borders of this land. Now tell us where he is; for I much desired to speakwithhimagain.But Icannotseehimfromafar,unless hecomeswithinthefencesof Lothlo´rien:agreymistisabout him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are hidden from me.’ ‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He remained in Moria and did not escape.’ At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and amazement. ‘These are evil tidings,’ said Celeborn, ‘the most evil that have been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.’ He turned to Haldir. ‘Why has nothing of this been told to me before?’ he asked in the elven-tongue. ‘We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our pur- pose,’ said Legolas. ‘At first we were weary and danger was too close behind; and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked in gladness on the fair paths of Lo´rien.’ ‘Yetourgriefisgreatandourlosscannotbemended,’said Frodo.‘Gandalfwasourguide,andheledusthrough Moria; and when our escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.’ ‘Tell us now the full tale!’ said Celeborn. Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he
the mirror of galadriel 463 spoke of Balin and his book, and the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow bridge, and the coming of the Terror. ‘An evil of the Ancient World it seemed, such as I have never seen before,’ said Aragorn. ‘It was both a shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.’ ‘Itwasa Balrogof Morgoth,’said Legolas;‘ofallelf-banes the most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’ ‘Indeed Isawuponthebridgethatwhichhauntsourdark- est dreams, I saw Durin’s Bane,’ said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes. ‘Alas!’ said Celeborn. ‘We long have feared that under Caradhras a terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves hadstirredupthisevilin Moriaagain,Iwouldhaveforbidden you to pass the northern borders, you and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one would say that at the last Gandalffellfromwisdomintofolly,goingneedlesslyintothe net of Moria.’ ‘He would be rash indeed that said that thing,’ said Galadriel gravely. ‘Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him knew not his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be with the guide, the followers are blameless. Do not repent of your welcome to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long and far from Lothlo´rien, who of the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish to lookupontheirancienthome,thoughithadbecomeanabode of dragons? ‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zaˆram, and cold are the springsof Kibil-naˆla,andfairwerethemany-pillaredhallsof Khazad-duˆm in Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings beneaththestone.’Shelookedupon Gimli,whosatglowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the names giveninhisownancienttongue,lookedupandmethereyes; and it seemed to him that he looked suddenly into the heart of anenemy and sawthere love andunderstanding. Wonder came into his face, and then he smiled in answer. Heroseclumsilyandbowedindwarf-fashion,saying:‘Yet
464 the fellowship of the ring morefairisthelivinglandof Lo´rien,andthe Lady Galadriel is above all the jewels that lie beneath the earth!’ Therewasasilence.Atlength Celebornspokeagain.‘Idid not know that your plight was so evil,’ he said. ‘Let Gimli forget my harsh words: I spoke in the trouble of my heart. I willdo what I cantoaid you,eachaccording tohis wishand need, but especially that one of the little folk who bears the burden.’ ‘Your quest is known to us,’ said Galadriel, looking at Frodo.‘Butwewillnotherespeakofitmoreopenly.Yetnot invainwillitprove,maybe,thatyoucametothislandseeking aid,as Gandalfhimselfplainlypurposed.Forthe Lordofthe Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of Middle- earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the powerof kings. He has dwelt in the West since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt withhimyearsuncounted;forerethefallof Nargothrondor Gondolin Ipassedoverthemountains,andtogetherthrough ages of the world we have fought the long defeat. ‘I it was who first summoned the White Council. And if mydesignshadnotgoneamiss,itwouldhavebeengoverned by Gandalf the Grey, and then mayhap things would have gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I will not giveyou counsel,saying dothis, ordo that.For notin doing or contriving, nor in choosing between this course and another, can I avail; but only in knowing what was and is, andinpartalsowhatshallbe.Butthis Iwillsaytoyou:your Quest stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little and it will fail, to the ruin of all. Yet hope remains while all the Company is true.’ And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silencelookedsearchinglyateachoftheminturn.Nonesave Legolas and Aragorn could long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head. At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, andshesmiled.‘Donotletyourheartsbetroubled,’shesaid. ‘Tonightyou shallsleep inpeace.’ Thenthey sighedand felt
the mirror of galadriel 465 suddenlyweary,asthosewhohavebeenquestionedlongand deeply, though no words had been spoken openly. ‘Go now!’ said Celeborn. ‘You are worn with sorrow and muchtoil.Evenifyour Questdidnotconcernusclosely,you should have refuge in this City, until you were healed and refreshed. Now you shall rest, and we will not speak of your further road for a while.’ That night the Company slept upon the ground, much to the satisfaction of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilionamongthetreesnearthefountain,andinittheylaid soft couches; then speaking words of peace with fair Elvish voicestheyleftthem.Foralittlewhilethetravellerstalkedof theirnightbeforeinthetree-tops,andoftheirday’sjourney, and of the Lord and Lady; for they had not yet the heart to look further back. ‘What did you blush for, Sam?’ said Pippin. ‘You soon broke down. Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.’ ‘Ineverthoughtnosuchthing,’answered Sam,innomood for jest. ‘If you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing on, and I didn’t like it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me what I would do if she gave me the chance of flying back home to the Shire to a nice little hole with – with a bit of garden of my own.’ ‘That’s funny,’ said Merry. ‘Almost exactly what I felt myself; only, only well, I don’t think I’ll say any more,’ he ended lamely. All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he was offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that layahead,andsomethingthathegreatlydesired:clearbefore his mind it lay, and to get it he had only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest and the war against Sauron to others. ‘And it seemed to me, too,’ said Gimli, ‘that my choice would remain secret and known only to myself.’
466 the fellowship of the ring ‘To me it seemed exceedingly strange,’ said Boromir. ‘Maybe it was only a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own good purpose; but almost I should have said that she was tempting us, and offering what she pretended to have the power to give. It need not be said that Irefusedtolisten.The Menof Minas Tiritharetruetotheir word.’ But what he thought that the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell. And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him with questions. ‘She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,’ he said. ‘Yes,’ said Frodo; ‘but whatever came into my mind then I will keep there.’ ‘Well, have acare!’ said Boromir. ‘Ido not feel toosure of this Elvish Lady and her purposes.’ ‘Speaknoevilofthe Lady Galadriel!’said Aragornsternly. ‘Youknownotwhatyousay.Thereisinherandinthisland no evil, unless a man bring it hither himself. Then let him beware!Buttonight Ishallsleepwithoutfearforthefirsttime since I left Rivendell. And may I sleep deep, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in body and in heart.’ He cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once into a long sleep. The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream disturbedtheirslumber.Whentheywoketheyfoundthatthe lightofdaywasbroaduponthelawnbeforethepavilion,and the fountain rose and fell glittering in the sun. They remained some days in Lothlo´rien, so far as they could tell or remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun shone clear, save for a gentle rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all things fresh and clean. The air wascoolandsoft,asifitwereearlyspring,yettheyfeltabout them the deep and thoughtful quiet of winter. It seemed to them that they did little but eat and drink and rest, and walk among the trees; and it was enough. Theyhadnotseenthe Lordand Ladyagain,andtheyhad
the mirror of galadriel 467 little speech with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or wouldusethe Westrontongue.Haldirhadbiddenthemfare- well and gone back again to the fences of the North, where great watch was now kept since the tidings of Moria that the Company had brought. Legolas was away much among the Galadhrim, and after the first night he did not sleep with the other companions, though he returned to eat and talk with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he went abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change. Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, and all that each had known and seen of him came clear before their minds. As they were healed of hurt andwearinessofbodythegriefoftheirlossgrewmorekeen. Oftentheyheardnearby Elvishvoicessinging,andknewthat they were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for they caught his name among the sweet sad words that they could not understand. Mithrandir,Mithrandirsangthe Elves,OPilgrim Grey!For so they loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Com- pany, he would not interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song. It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into haltingwords.Hewasseldommovedtomakesongorrhyme; even in Rivendell he had listened and had not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things that others had made before him. But now as he sat beside the fountain in Lo´rien and heard about him the voices of the Elves, his thought took shape in a song that seemed fair to him; yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves. When evening in the Shire was grey his footsteps on the Hill were heard; before the dawn he went away on journey long without a word.
468 the fellowship of the ring From Wilderland to Western shore, from northern waste to southern hill, through dragon-lair and hidden door and darkling woods he walked at will. With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men, with mortal and immortal folk, with bird on bough and beast in den, in their own secret tongues he spoke. A deadly sword, a healing hand, a back that bent beneath its load; a trumpet-voice, a burning brand, a weary pilgrim on the road. A lord of wisdom throned he sat, swift in anger, quick to laugh; an old man in a battered hat who leaned upon a thorny staff. He stood upon the bridge alone and Fire and Shadow both defied; his staff was broken on the stone, in Khazad-duˆm his wisdom died. ‘Why, you’ll be beating Mr. Bilbo next!’ said Sam. ‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Frodo. ‘But that is the best I can do yet.’ ‘Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you’ll say a word about his fireworks,’ said Sam. ‘Something like this: The finest rockets ever seen: they burst in stars of blue and green, or after thunder golden showers came falling like a rain of flowers.
the mirror of galadriel 469 Though that doesn’t do them justice by a long road.’ ‘No, I’ll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But – well, I can’t talk of it any more. I can’t bear to think of bringing the news to him.’ One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool twilight. Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenlytheshadowofpartinghadfallen:heknewsomehow that the time was very near when he must leave Lothlo´rien. ‘What do you think of Elves now, Sam?’ he said. ‘I asked you the same question once before – it seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more of them since then.’ ‘I have indeed!’ said Sam. ‘And I reckon there’s Elves and Elves.They’reall Elvishenough,butthey’renotallthesame. Nowthesefolkaren’twanderersorhomeless,andseemabit nearertothelikesofus:theyseemtobelonghere,moreeven than Hobbitsdointhe Shire.Whetherthey’vemadetheland, or the land’s made them, it’s hard to say, if you take my meaning. It’s wonderfully quiet here. Nothing seems to be going on, and nobody seems to want it to. If there’s any magicabout,it’srightdowndeep,where Ican’tlaymyhands on it, in a manner of speaking.’ ‘You can see and feel it everywhere,’ said Frodo. ‘Well,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t see nobody working it. No fireworks like poor old Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don’t see nothing of the Lord and Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things, if she had a mind. I’d dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo!’ ‘I wouldn’t,’ said Frodo. ‘I am content. And I don’t miss Gandalf’s fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.’ ‘You’reright,’said Sam.‘Anddon’tthink I’mfindingfault. I’ve often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but I’ve never heard of a better land than this. It’s like being at home and on a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don’t want to leave. All the same, I’m
470 the fellowship of the ring beginning to feel that if we’ve got to go on, then we’d best get it over. ‘It’s the job that’s never started as takes longest to finish, as my old gaffer used to say. And I don’t reckon that these folk candomuchmoretohelpus,magicorno.It’swhenweleave this land that we shall miss Gandalf worse, I’m thinking.’ ‘I am afraid that’s only too true, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet I hope very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.’ Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to their words, the Lady Galadriel approaching. Tall and white and fair she walked beneath the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them. Turning aside, she led them towards the southern slopes of the hill of Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high green hedge they came into an enclosed garden. No trees grew there, and it lay open to the sky. The evening star had risen and was shining with white fire above the western woods. Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into the deep green hollow, through which ran murmuring the silver stream that issued from the fountain on the hill. At the bottom, upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree, stood a basin of silver, wide and shallow, and beside it stood a silver ewer. With water from the stream Galadriel filled the basin to the brim, and breathed on it, and when the water was still again she spoke. ‘Here is the Mirror of Galadriel,’ she said. ‘I have brought you here so that you may look in it, if you will.’ The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf- lady beside him was tall and pale. ‘What shall we look for, and what shall we see?’ asked Frodo, filled with awe. ‘Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,’ she answered, ‘and to some I can show what they desire to see. Butthe Mirrorwillalsoshowthingsunbidden,andthoseare oftenstrangerandmoreprofitablethanthingswhichwewish to behold. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror free to
the mirror of galadriel 471 work, I cannot tell. For it shows things that were, and things that are, and things that yet may be. But which it is that he sees,eventhewisestcannotalwaystell.Doyouwishtolook?’ Frodo did not answer. ‘Andyou?’shesaid,turningto Sam.‘Forthisiswhatyour folk would call magic, I believe; though I do not understand clearlywhattheymean; andtheyseemtousethe sameword of the deceits of the Enemy. But this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not say that you wished to see Elf-magic?’ ‘I did,’ said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curi- osity. ‘I’ll have a peep, Lady, if you’re willing. ‘And I’d not mind a glimpse of what’s going on at home,’ he said in an aside to Frodo. ‘It seems a terrible long time that I’ve been away. But there, like as not I’ll only see the stars, or something that I won’t understand.’ ‘Likeasnot,’saidthe Ladywithagentlelaugh.‘Butcome, you shall look and see what you may. Do not touch the water!’ Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin. The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it. ‘There’s only stars, as I thought,’ he said. Then he gave a low gasp, for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had been withdrawn, the Mirror grew grey, and then clear. There was sunshining,andthebranchesoftreeswerewavingandtoss- ing in the wind. But before Sam could make up his mind what it was that he saw, the light faded; and now he thought he saw Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed to see himself going along a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently for something, but what it was he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went back, and he saw the trees again. But this timetheywerenotsoclose,andhecouldseewhatwasgoing on: they were not waving in the wind, they were falling, crashing to the ground.
472 the fellowship of the ring ‘Hi!’ cried Sam in an outraged voice. ‘There’s that Ted Sandymana-cuttingdowntreesasheshouldn’t.Theydidn’t oughttobefelled:it’sthatavenuebeyondthe Millthatshades the road to Bywater. I wish I could get at Ted, and I’d fell him!’ But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large red-brick building was being put up where it had stood. Lots of folk were busily at work. There was a tall red chimneynearby.Blacksmokeseemedtocloudthesurfaceof the Mirror. ‘There’ssomedevilryatworkinthe Shire,’hesaid.‘Elrond knewwhathewasaboutwhenhewantedtosend Mr.Merry back.’ Then suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away. ‘I can’t stay here,’ he said wildly. ‘I must go home. They’ve dug up Bagshot Row, and there’s the poor old Gaffer going down the Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go home!’ ‘You cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ‘You did not wish to go home without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and yet you knew that evil things might well be happening in the Shire. Remember that the Mirror shows many things, and not all have yet come to pass. Some never come to be, unless those that behold the visions turn aside fromtheirpathtopreventthem.The Mirrorisdangerousas a guide of deeds.’ Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. ‘I wish Ihadnevercomehere,and Idon’twanttoseenomore magic,’hesaidandfellsilent.Afteramomenthespokeagain thickly, as if struggling with tears. ‘No, I’ll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said. ‘But I hope I do get back some day. If what I’ve seen turns out true, somebody’s going to catch it hot!’ ‘Doyounowwishtolook,Frodo?’saidthe Lady Galadriel. ‘You did not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’ ‘Do you advise me to look?’ asked Frodo. ‘No,’ she said. ‘I do not counsel you one way or the other.
the mirror of galadriel 473 Iamnotacounsellor.Youmaylearnsomething,andwhether what you see be fair or evil, that may be profitable, and yet it may not. Seeing is both good and perilous. Yet I think, Frodo, that you have courage and wisdom enough for the venture, or I would not have brought you here. Do as you will!’ ‘I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal andbentoverthedarkwater.Atoncethe Mirrorclearedand he saw a twilit land. Mountains loomed dark in the distance againstapalesky.Alonggreyroadwoundbackoutofsight. Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint and smallatfirst,butgrowinglargerandclearerasitapproached. Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded him of Gandalf. He almost called aloud the wizard’s name, and then he saw thatthefigurewasclothednotingreybutinwhite,inawhite that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its hand there was a whitestaff.Theheadwassobowedthathecouldseenoface, and presently the figure turned aside round a bend in the road and went out of the Mirror’s view. Doubt came into Frodo’s mind: was this a vision of Gandalf on one of his many lonely journeys long ago, or was it Saruman? Thevisionnowchanged.Briefandsmallbutveryvividhe caught a glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. The table waslittered with disordered papers;rain was beat- ing on the windows. Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes followed that Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had become involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen before but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose and raged in a great storm.Then hesaw againstthe Sun,sinking blood-red into a wrack of clouds, the black outline of a tall ship with tornsailsridingupoutofthe West.Thenawideriverflowing through a populous city. Then a white fortress with seven towers.Andthenagainashipwithblacksails,butnowitwas morningagain,andthewaterrippledwithlight,andabanner bearingtheemblemofawhitetreeshoneinthesun.Asmoke
474 the fellowship of the ring as of fire and battle arose, and again the sun went down in a burning red that faded into a grey mist; and into the mist a small ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away. But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole had opened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the black abyss there appeared a single Eye that slowly grew, until it filled nearly all the Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to cry out or towithdrawhisgaze.The Eyewasrimmedwithfire,butwas itself glazed, yellow as a cat’s, watchful and intent, and the blackslitofitspupilopenedonapit,awindowintonothing. Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the many things that it sought he himself was one. But he also knew thatit couldnot see him– notyet, not unlesshe willed it. The Ring that hung upon its chain about his neck grew heavy, heavier than a great stone, and his head was dragged downwards.The Mirrorseemedtobegrowinghotandcurls ofsteamwererisingfromthewater.Hewasslippingforward. ‘Do not touch the water!’ said the Lady Galadriel softly. The vision faded, and Frodo found that he was looking at the cool stars twinkling in the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady. ‘I know what it was that you last saw,’ she said; ‘for that is alsoinmymind.Donotbeafraid!Butdonotthinkthatonly by singing amid the trees, nor even by the slender arrows of elven-bows, is this land of Lothlo´rien maintained and defended against its Enemy. I say to you, Frodo, that even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my thought. But still the door is closed!’ She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towardsthe Eastinagestureofrejectionanddenial.Ea¨rendil, the Evening Star, most beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it that the figure of the Elven-lady cast
the mirror of galadriel 475 a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring about her finger; it glittered like polished gold overlaid with silver light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even- star had come down to rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed to him that he understood. ‘Yes,’ she said, divining his thought, ‘it is not permitted to speak of it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be hiddenfromthe Ring-bearer,andonewhohasseenthe Eye. Verily it is in the land of Lo´rien upon the finger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains. This is Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper. ‘He suspects, but he does not know – not yet. Do you not see now wherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of Doom? For if you fail, then we are laid bare to the Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then our power is diminished, and Lothlo´rienwillfade,andthetidesof Timewillsweepitaway. We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell and cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.’ Frodo bent his head. ‘And what do you wish?’ he said at last. ‘Thatwhatshouldbeshallbe,’sheanswered.‘Theloveof the Elves for their land and their works is deeper than the deepsofthe Sea,andtheirregretisundyingandcannotever wholly be assuaged. Yet they will cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they know him now. For the fate of Lothlo´rien you are not answerable, but only for the doing of yourowntask.Yet Icouldwish,wereitofanyavail,thatthe One Ringhadneverbeenwrought,orhadremainedforever lost.’ ‘You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,’ said Frodo. ‘I will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter for me.’ Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. ‘Wise the Lady Galadriel may be,’ she said, ‘yet here she has met her match in courtesy. Gently are you revenged for my testing of your heart at our first meeting. You begin to see with a
476 the fellowship of the ring keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to askwhatyouoffer.Formanylongyears Ihadponderedwhat I might do, should the Great Ring come into my hands, and behold! it was brought within my grasp. The evil that was devised long ago works on in many ways, whether Sauron himself stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deedto setto thecredit ofhis Ring,if Ihad takenit byforce or fear from my guest? ‘Andnowatlastitcomes.Youwillgivemethe Ringfreely! In place of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And I shall not be dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Dreadful as the Storm and the Light- ning! Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair!’ She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore there issued a great light that illumined her alone and left all else dark. She stood before Frodo seeming now tall beyond measurement, and beautiful beyond enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light faded, andsuddenlyshelaughedagain,andlo!shewasshrunken:a slender elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad. ‘I pass the test,’ she said. ‘I will diminish, and go into the West, and remain Galadriel.’ They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke again. ‘Let us return!’ she said. ‘In the morning you must depart, for now we have chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.’ ‘I would ask one thing before we go,’ said Frodo, ‘a thing which I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am per- mitted to wear the One Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts of those that wear them?’ ‘You have not tried,’ she said. ‘Only thrice have you set the Ring upon your finger since you knew what you pos- sessed. Do not try! It would destroy you. Did not Gandalf
the mirror of galadriel 477 tell you that the rings give power according to the measure of each possessor? Before you could use that power you would need to become far stronger, and to train your will to thedominationofothers.Yetevenso,as Ring-bearerandas onethathasborneitonfingerandseenthatwhichishidden, your sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thought more clearly than many that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that holds the Seven and the Nine. And did you not see and recognizethe ring upon my finger? Did you see my ring?’ she asked turning again to Sam. ‘No,Lady,’heanswered.‘Totellyouthetruth,Iwondered what you were talking about. I saw a star through your fingers. But if you’ll pardon my speaking out, I think my masterwasright.Iwishyou’dtakehis Ring.You’dputthings torights.You’dstopthemdiggingupthe Gafferandturning him adrift. You’d make some folk pay for their dirty work.’ ‘I would,’ she said. ‘That is how it would begin. But it would not stop with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!’
Chapter 8 FAREWELL TO LO´ RIEN That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn, and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words. At length Celeborn spoke of their departure. ‘Now is the time,’ he said, ‘when those who wish to con- tinue the Quest must harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no longer wish to go forward may remain here, for awhile. But whether theystay or go,none can be sureof peace.Forwearecomenowtotheedgeofdoom.Herethose who wish may await the oncoming of the hour till either the waysoftheworldlieopenagain,orwesummonthemtothe lastneedof Lo´rien.Thentheymayreturntotheirownlands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in battle.’ Therewasasilence.‘Theyallresolvedtogoforward,’said Galadriel looking in their eyes. ‘As for me,’ said Boromir, ‘my way home lies onward and not back.’ ‘Thatistrue,’said Celeborn,‘butisallthis Companygoing with you to Minas Tirith?’ ‘We have not decided our course,’ said Aragorn. ‘Beyond Lothlo´rien I do not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had any clear purpose.’ ‘Maybe not,’ said Celeborn, ‘yet when you leave this land, you can no longer forget the Great River. As some of you know well, it cannot be crossed by travellers with baggage between Lo´rien and Gondor, save by boat. And are not the bridges of Osgiliath broken down and all the landings held now by the Enemy? ‘Onwhichsidewillyoujourney?Thewayto Minas Tirith liesuponthisside,uponthewest;butthestraightroadofthe
farewell to lo´rien 479 Quest lies east of the River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take?’ ‘If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way to Minas Tirith,’ answered Boromir. ‘But I am not the leader of the Company.’ The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled. ‘Iseethatyoudonotyetknowwhattodo,’said Celeborn. ‘It is not my part to choose for you; but I will help you as I may. There are some among you who can handle boats: Legolas,whosefolkknowtheswift Forest River;and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.’ ‘And one Hobbit!’ cried Merry. ‘Not all of us look on boats as wild horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.’ ‘That is well,’ said Celeborn. ‘Then I will furnish your Company with boats. They must be small and light, for if yougofarbywater,thereareplaceswhereyouwillbeforced to carry them. You will come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir, andmaybeatlasttothegreatfallsof Rauroswherethe River thundersdownfrom Nen Hithoel;andthereareotherperils. Boats may make your journey less toilsome for a while. Yet they will not give you counsel: in the end you must leave them and the River, and turn west – or east.’ Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats comforted him much, not least because there would now be no need to decide his course for some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead, it seemed better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to plod forward with bent backs. Only Sam was doubt- ful: he at any rate still thought boats as bad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that he had survived made him think better of them. ‘All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven beforenoontomorrow,’said Celeborn.‘Iwillsendmypeople toyouinthemorningtohelpyoumakereadyforthejourney. Now we will wish you all a fair night and untroubled sleep.’ ‘Good night, my friends!’ said Galadriel. ‘Sleep in peace!
480 the fellowship of the ring Do not trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the road tonight. Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are already laid before your feet, though you do not see them. Good night!’ The Company now took their leave and returned to their pavilion.Legolaswentwiththem,forthiswastobetheirlast night in Lothlo´rien, and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take counsel together. For a long time they debated what they should do, and howitwouldbebesttoattemptthefulfillingoftheirpurpose withthe Ring;buttheycametonodecision.Itwasplainthat mostofthemdesiredtogofirstto Minas Tirith,andtoescape atleastforawhilefromtheterrorofthe Enemy.Theywould have been willing to follow a leader over the River and into the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in his mind. His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go with Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor.Forhebelievedthatthemessageofthedreamswas asummons,andthatthehourhadcomeatlastwhentheheir of Elendil should come forth and strive with Sauron for the mastery. But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laid onhim;andheknewthathecouldnotnowforsakethe Ring, if Frodorefusedintheendtogowith Boromir.Andyetwhat help could he or any of the Company give to Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness? ‘I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,’ said Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while, sitting with his eyes fixed on Frodo, as if he was trying to readthe Halfling’sthoughts.Atlengthhespokeagain,softly, asifhewasdebatingwithhimself.‘Ifyouwishonlytodestroy the Ring,’hesaid,‘thenthereislittleuseinwarandweapons; andthe Menof Minas Tirithcannothelp.Butifyouwishto destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then it is folly to go without force into his domain; and folly to throw away.’ He paused suddenly, as if he had become aware that he was
farewell to lo´rien 481 speaking his thoughts aloud. ‘It would be folly to throw lives away, I mean,’ he ended. ‘It is a choice between defending a strong place and walking openly into the arms of death. At least, that is how I see it.’ Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir’s glance,andhelookedhardathim.Plainly Boromir’sthought wasdifferent fromhis finalwords. Itwouldbe follyto throw away:what?The Ringof Power?Hehadsaidsomethinglike this at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought and made no sign that he had heeded Boromir’s words. And so their debate ended. Merry and Pippinwerealreadyasleep,and Samwasnodding.Thenight was growing old. In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slen- der goods, Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them many gifts of food and clothing for the journey.Thefoodwasmostlyintheformofverythincakes, made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside, andinsidewasthecolourofcream.Gimlitookuponeofthe cakes and looked at it with a doubtful eye. ‘Cram,’ he said under his breath, as he broke off a crisp cornerandnibbledatit.Hisexpressionquicklychanged,and he ate all the rest of the cake with relish. ‘No more, no more!’ cried the Elves laughing. ‘You have eaten enough already for a long day’s march.’ ‘Ithoughtitwasonlyakindofcram,suchasthe Dale-men make for journeys in the wild,’ said the Dwarf. ‘Soitis,’theyanswered.‘Butwecallitlembasorwaybread, and it is more strengthening than any food made by Men, and it is more pleasant than cram, by all accounts.’ ‘Indeeditis,’said Gimli.‘Why,itisbetterthanthehoney- cakes of the Beornings, and that is great praise, for the Beornings are the best bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts!’
482 the fellowship of the ring ‘All the same, we bid you spare the food,’ they said. ‘Eat little at a time, and only at need. For these things are given to serve you when all else fails. The cakes will keep sweet for many many days, if they are unbroken and left in their leaf-wrappings, as we have brought them. One will keep a traveller on his feet for a day of long labour, even if he be one of the tall Men of Minas Tirith.’ The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Com- pany the clothes they had brought. For each they had pro- vided a hood and cloak, made according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim wove. It was hard to say of what colour they were: grey with the hue of twilight under the trees they seemed to be; and yet if they were moved, or set in another light, they were green as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow fields by night, dusk- silveraswaterunderthestars.Eachcloakwasfastenedabout the neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver. ‘Are these magic cloaks?’ asked Pippin, looking at them with wonder. ‘I do not know what you mean by that,’ answered the leader of the Elves. ‘They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was made in this land. They are Elvish robes certainly, if that is what you mean. Leaf and branch, water and stone: they have the hue and beauty of all these things under the twilight of Lo´rien that we love; for we put the thoughtofallthatweloveintoallthatwemake.Yettheyare garments, not armour, and they will not turn shaft or blade. But they should serve you well: they are light to wear, and warmenoughorcoolenoughatneed.Andyouwillfindthem a great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you walk among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of the Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.’ Aftertheirmorningmealthe Companysaidfarewelltothe lawn by the fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a
farewell to lo´rien 483 fairplace,andithadbecomelikehometothem,thoughthey could not count the days and nights that they had passed there.Astheystoodforamomentlookingatthewhitewater in the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the green grass of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight. ‘I have returned from the Northern Fences,’ said the Elf, ‘and Iamsentnowtobeyourguideagain.The Dimrill Dale isfullofvapourandcloudsofsmoke,andthemountainsare troubled. There are noises in the deeps of the earth. If any of you had thought of returning northwards to your homes, you would not have been able to pass that way. But come! Your path now goes south.’ As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were empty; but in the trees above them many voices were murmuring and singing. They themselves went silently. At last Haldir led them down the southward slopes of the hill, and they came again to the great gate hung with lamps, and to the white bridge; and so they passed out and left the city of the Elves. Then they turned away from the paved road and took a path that went off into a deep thicket of mallorn- trees, and passed on, winding through rolling woodlands of silvershadow,leadingthemeverdown,southwardsandeast- wards, towards the shores of the River. They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when they came on a high green wall. Passing through an opening they came suddenly out of the trees. Before them lay a long lawn of shining grass, studded with golden elanor thatglintedinthesun.Thelawnranoutintoanarrowtongue between bright margins: on the right and west the Silverlode flowed glittering; on the left and east the Great River rolled its broad waters, deep and dark. On the further shores the woodlands still marched on southwards as far as eye could see, but all the banks were bleak and bare. No mallorn lifted its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lo´rien. On the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from themeetingofthestreams,therewasahytheofwhitestones and white wood. By it were moored many boats and barges.
484 the fellowship of the ring Some were brightly painted, and shone with silver and gold and green, but most were either white or grey. Three small grey boats had been made ready for the travellers, and in thesethe Elvesstowedtheirgoods.Andtheyaddedalsocoils of rope, three to each boat. Slender they looked, but strong, silken to the touch, grey of hue like the elven-cloaks. ‘What are these?’ asked Sam, handling one that lay upon the greensward. ‘Ropes indeed!’ answered an Elf from the boats. ‘Never travelfarwithoutarope!Andonethatislongandstrongand light. Such are these. They may be a help in many needs.’ ‘Youdon’tneedtotellmethat!’said Sam.‘Icamewithout any, and I’ve been worried ever since. But I was wondering what these were made of, knowing a bit about rope-making: it’s in the family as you might say.’ ‘They are made of hithlain,’ said the Elf, ‘but there is no time now to instruct you in the art of their making. Had we known that this craft delighted you, we could have taught you much. But now alas! unless you should at some time returnhither,youmustbecontentwithourgift.Mayitserve you well!’ ‘Come!’ said Haldir. ‘All is now ready for you. Enter the boats! But take care at first!’ ‘Heed the words!’ said the other Elves. ‘These boats are light-built, and they are crafty and unlike the boats of other folk. They will not sink, lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It would be wise if you accustomed yourselves to stepping in and out, here where there is a landing-place, before you set off downstream.’ The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the third were Legolas and Gimli, who had now become fast friends. In this last boat most of the goods and packs were stowed. The boats were moved and steered with short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all was ready Aragorn led them on a trial up
farewell to lo´rien 485 the Silverlode. The current was swift and they went forward slowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and looking back wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on the waterdazzledhiseyes.Astheypassedbeyondthegreenfield ofthe Tongue,thetreesdrewdowntotheriver’sbrink.Here and there golden leaves tossed and floated on the rippling stream. The air was very bright and still, and there was a silence, except for the high distant song of larks. They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing proudly down the stream towards them, they saw a swan of greatsize.Thewaterrippledoneithersideofthewhitebreast beneath its curving neck. Its beak shone like burnished gold, anditseyesglintedlikejetsetinyellowstones;itshugewhite wings were half lifted. A music came down the river as it drew nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was a ship, wrought and carved with elven-skill in the likeness of a bird. Two elves clad in white steered it with black paddles. In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind him stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sad and sweet was the sound of her voice in the cool clear air: I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew: Ofwind Isang,awindtherecameandinthebranchesblew. Beyondthe Sun,beyondthe Moon,thefoamwasonthe Sea, And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree. Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone, In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion. There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching years, While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven- tears. O Lo´rien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day; The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away. O Lo´rien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.
486 the fellowship of the ring But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me, What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea? Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The Ladyendedhersongandgreetedthem.‘Wehavecome to bid our last farewell,’ she said, ‘and to speed you with blessings from our land.’ ‘Though you have been our guests,’ said Celeborn, ‘you have not yet eaten with us, and we bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between the flowing waters that will bear you far from Lo´rien.’ The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their boats and followed it. There in the last end of Egladil upon the green grass the parting feast was held; but Frodo ateand dranklittle, heedingonly thebeautyof the Lady and hervoice.Sheseemednolongerperilousorterrible,norfilled with hidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by men of later days Elves still at times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision of that which has already been left far behind by the flowing streams of Time. After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass, Celebornspoketothemagainoftheirjourney,andliftinghis hand he pointed south to the woods beyond the Tongue. ‘Asyougodownthewater,’hesaid,‘youwillfindthatthe trees will fail, and you will come to a barren country. There the River flows in stony vales amid high moors, until at last aftermanyleaguesitcomestothetallislandofthe Tindrock, that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its arms about the steep shores of the isle, and falls then with a great noise and smoke over the cataracts of Rauros down into the Nindalf, the Wetwang as it is called in your tongue. That is a wide region of sluggish fen where the stream becomes tortuous and much divided. There the Entwash flows in by many mouths from the Forest of Fangorn in the west. About that stream, on this side of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the
farewell to lo´rien 487 further side are the bleak hills of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they look out over the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the black gates of Mordor. ‘Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith, will do well to leave the Great River above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it findsthe marshes. Yet they should not gotoofarupthatstream,norriskbecomingentangledinthe Forest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is now little known.But Boromirand Aragorndoubtlessdonotneedthis warning.’ ‘Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,’ said Boromir. ‘But what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives’ tales, such as we tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is now to us so far away that fancy can wander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay upon the borders of our realm; but it is now many lives of men since any of us visited it, to prove or disprove the legends that have come down from distant years. ‘I have myself been at whiles in Rohan, but I have never crossed it northwards. When I was sent out as a messenger, I passed through the Gap by the skirts of the White Moun- tains, and crossed the Isen and the Greyflood into Norther- land. A long and wearisome journey. Four hundred leagues I reckoned it, and it took me many months; for I lost my horse at Tharbad, at the fording of the Greyflood. After that journey, and the road I have trodden with this Company, I do not much doubt that I shall find a way through Rohan, and Fangorn too, if need be.’ ‘Then I need say no more,’ said Celeborn. ‘But do not despise the lore that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance that old wives keep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know.’ Now Galadriel rose from the grass, and taking a cup from one of her maidens she filled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn.
488 the fellowship of the ring ‘Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell,’ she said. ‘Drink, Lord of the Galadhrim! And let not your heart be sad,thoughnightmustfollownoon,andalreadyourevening draweth nigh.’ Then she brought the cup to each of the Company, and bade them drink and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded them to sit again on the grass, and chairs were set forher andfor Celeborn. Hermaidens stoodsilent about her,andawhileshelookeduponherguests.Atlastshespoke again. ‘We have drunk the cup of parting,’ she said, ‘and the shadows fall between us. But before you go, I have brought in my ship gifts which the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer you in memory of Lothlo´rien.’ Then she called to each in turn. ‘Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your Company,’ she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made to fit his sword. It was overlaid with a tracery of flowers and leaves wrought of silver and gold,andonitweresetinelven-runesformedofmanygems the name Andu´ril and the lineage of the sword. ‘The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be stainedorbrokenevenindefeat,’shesaid.‘Butisthereaught else that you desire of me at our parting? For darkness will flow between us, and it may be that we shall not meet again, unless it be far hence upon a road that has no returning.’ And Aragorn answered: ‘Lady, you know all my desire, and long held in keeping the only treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to give me, even if youwould; and only through darkness shall I come to it.’ ‘Yetmaybethiswilllightenyourheart,’said Galadriel;‘for it was left in my care to be given to you, should you pass throughthisland.’Thensheliftedfromherlapagreatstone of a clear green, set in a silver brooch that was wrought in thelikenessofaneaglewithoutspreadwings;andassheheld it up the gem flashed like the sun shining through the leaves of spring. ‘This stone I gave to Celebr´ıan my daughter, and
farewell to lo´rien 489 she to hers; and now it comes to you as a token of hope. In this hour take the name that was foretold for you, Elessar, the Elfstone of the House of Elendil!’ Then Aragorntookthestoneandpinnedthebroochupon his breast, and those who saw him wondered; for they had notmarkedbeforehowtallandkinglyhestood,anditseemed tothemthatmanyyearsoftoilhadfallenfromhisshoulders. ‘For the gifts that you have given me I thank you,’ he said, ‘O Lady of Lo´rien of whom were sprung Celebr´ıan and Arwen Evenstar. What praise could I say more?’ The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boro- mir, and to him she gave a belt of gold; and to Merry and Pippin she gave small silver belts, each with a clasp wrought like a golden flower. To Legolas she gave a bow such as the Galadhrim used, longer and stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, and strung with a string of elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows. ‘Foryoulittlegardenerandloveroftrees,’shesaidto Sam, ‘Ihave onlya smallgift.’ Sheput intohis handa littlebox of plaingreywood,unadornedsaveforasinglesilverruneupon thelid.‘Hereisset Gfor Galadriel,’shesaid;‘butalsoitmay stand for garden in your tongue. In this box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing as Galadriel has still to bestow is upon it. It will not keep you on your road, nor defend you against any peril; but if you keep it and see your homeagainatlast,thenperhapsitmayrewardyou.Though you should find all barren and laid waste, there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember Galadriel, and catch a glimpse far off of Lo´rien, that you haveseenonlyinourwinter.Forour Springandour Summer are gone by, and they will never be seen on earth again save in memory.’ Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaud- ible, as he clutched the box and bowed as well as he could. ‘And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves?’ said Galadriel, turning to Gimli.
490 the fellowship of the ring ‘None,Lady,’answered Gimli.‘Itisenoughformetohave seenthe Ladyofthe Galadhrim,andtohaveheardhergentle words.’ ‘Hear all ye Elves!’ she cried to those about her. ‘Let none say again that Dwarves are grasping and ungracious! Yet surely,Gimlisonof Glo´in,youdesiresomethingthat Icould give? Name it, I bid you! You shall not be the only guest without a gift.’ ‘Thereisnothing,Lady Galadriel,’said Gimli,bowinglow and stammering. ‘Nothing, unless it might be – unless it is permitted to ask, nay, to name a single strand of your hair, which surpasses the gold of the earth as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But you commanded me to name my desire.’ The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and Celeborngazedatthe Dwarfinwonder,butthe Ladysmiled. ‘Itissaidthattheskillofthe Dwarvesisintheirhandsrather than in their tongues,’ she said; ‘yet that is not true of Gimli. For none have ever made to me a request so bold and yet so courteous. And how shall I refuse, since I commanded him to speak? But tell me, what would you do with such a gift?’ ‘Treasure it, Lady,’ he answered, ‘in memory of your words to me at our first meeting. And if ever I return to the smithies of my home, it shall be set in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of my house, and a pledge of good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.’ Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut offthreegoldenhairs,andlaidthemin Gimli’shand.‘These words shall go with the gift,’ she said. ‘I do not foretell, for allforetellingisnowvain:ontheonehandliesdarkness,and on the other only hope. But if hope should not fail, then I say to you, Gimli son of Glo´in, that your hands shall flow with gold, and yet over you gold shall have no dominion. ‘Andyou,Ring-bearer,’shesaid,turningto Frodo.‘Icome to you last who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared this.’ She held up a small crystal phial: it glittered
farewell to lo´rien 491 asshemovedit,andraysofwhitelightsprangfromherhand. ‘In this phial,’ she said, ‘is caught the light of Ea¨rendil’s star, set amid the waters of my fountain. It will shine still brighter when night is about you. May it be a light to you in dark places,whenallotherlightsgoout.Remember Galadrieland her Mirror!’ Frodotookthephial,andforamomentasitshonebetween them, he saw her again standing like a queen, great and beautiful, but no longer terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say. Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to the hythe. A yellow noon lay on the green land of the Tongue, andthewaterglitteredwithsilver.Allatlastwasmadeready. The Companytooktheirplacesintheboatsasbefore.Crying farewell,the Elvesof Lo´rienwithlonggreypolesthrustthem out into the flowing stream, and the rippling waters bore them slowly away. The travellers sat still without moving or speaking. On the green bank near to the very point of the Tongue the Lady Galadriel stood alone and silent. As they passed her they turned and their eyes watched her slowly floating away from them. For so it seemed to them: Lo´rien was slipping backward, like a bright ship masted with enchantedtrees,sailingontoforgottenshores,whiletheysat helpless upon the margin of the grey and leafless world. Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the currentsofthe Great River,andtheirboatsturnedandbegan to speed southward. Soon the white form of the Lady was small and distant. She shone like a window of glass upon a far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from a mountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then it seemed to Frodo that she lifted her arms in a final farewell, and far but piercing-clear on the following wind came the sound of her voice singing. But now she sang in the ancient tongue of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not under- stand the words: fair was the music, but it did not comfort him.
492 the fellowship of the ring Yetasisthewayof Elvishwords,theyremainedgravenin hismemory,andlongafterwardsheinterpretedthem,aswell as he could: the language was that of Elven-song and spoke of things little known on Middle-earth. Ai! laurie¨ lantar lassi su´rinen, ye´ni u´no´time¨ ve ra´mar aldaron! Ye´ni ve linte¨ yuldar ava´nier mi oromardi lisse-miruvo´reva Andu´ne¨ pella, Vardo tellumar nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni o´maryo aireta´ri-l´ırinen. S´ı man i yulma nin enquantuva? An s´ı Tintalle¨ Varda Oiolosse¨o ve fanyar ma´ryat Elenta´ri ortane¨, ar ilye¨ tier undula´ve¨ lumbule¨; ar sindano´riello caita mornie¨ i falmalinnar imbe¨ met, ar h´ısie¨ untu´pa Calaciryo m´ıri oiale¨. S´ı vanwa na´, Ro´mello vanwa, Valimar! Nama´rie¨! Nai hiruvalye¨ Valimar. Nai elye¨ hiruva. Nama´rie¨! ‘Ah!likegoldfalltheleavesinthewind,longyearsnumber- less as the wings of trees! The years have passed like swift draughts of the sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults of Varda wherein the stars tremble in the song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who now shall refillthecupforme?Fornowthe Kindler,Varda,the Queen of the Stars, from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds, and all paths are drowned deep in shadow; and out of a grey country darkness lies on the foaming waves between us, and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever. Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell!
farewell to lo´rien 493 Maybe thou shalt find Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt find it.Farewell!’Vardaisthenameofthat Ladywhomthe Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth. Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks roseuponeitherside,andthelightof Lo´rienwashidden.To that fair land Frodo never came again. The travellers now turned their faces to the journey; the sunwasbeforethem,andtheireyesweredazzled,forallwere filled with tears. Gimli wept openly. ‘Ihavelookedthelastuponthatwhichwasfairest,’hesaid to Legolas his companion. ‘Henceforward I will call nothing fair, unless it be her gift.’ He put his hand to his breast. ‘Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this Quest? Little did I know where the chief peril lay! Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we could not foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark was the danger that I feared, anditdidnotholdmeback.But Iwouldnothavecome,had I known the danger of light and joy. Now I have taken my worst wound in this parting, even if I were to go this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for Gimli son of Glo´in!’ ‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world in these after-days. For such is the way of it: to find and lose, as it seems to those whose boat is on the runningstream.But Icountyoublessed,Gimlisonof Glo´in: foryourlossyousufferofyourownfreewill,andyoumight havechosenotherwise.Butyouhavenotforsakenyourcom- panions, and the least reward that you shall have is that the memory of Lothlo´rien shall remain ever clear and unstained in your heart, and shall neither fade nor grow stale.’ ‘Maybe,’said Gimli;‘and Ithankyouforyourwords.True words doubtless; yet all such comfort is cold. Memory is not what the heart desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zaˆram.Orsosaystheheartof Gimlithe Dwarf.Elves may see things otherwise. Indeed I have heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream. Not so for Dwarves.
494 the fellowship of the ring ‘But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in the water with all this baggage, and the Great River is swift.Idonotwishtodrownmygriefincoldwater.’Hetook upapaddle,andsteeredtowardsthewesternbank,following Aragorn’s boat ahead, which had already moved out of the middle stream. So the Company went on their long way, down the wide hurrying waters, borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank, and they could not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze died away and the River flowed withoutasound.Novoiceofbirdbrokethesilence.Thesun grewmistyasthedaygrewold,untilitgleamedinapalesky likeahighwhitepearl.Thenitfadedintothe West,anddusk came early, followed by a grey and starless night. Far into thedarkquiethourstheyfloatedon,guidingtheirboatsunder the overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great trees passed by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty roots throughthemistdownintothewater.Itwasdrearyandcold. Frodosatandlistenedtothefaintlapandgurgleofthe River fretting among the tree-roots and driftwood near the shore, until his head nodded and he fell into an uneasy sleep.
Chapter 9 THE GREAT RIVER Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well wrapped, under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the westbank of the Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night away, and the grey of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire near at hand. They started again before the day was broad. Not that most of the Company were eager to hurry southwards: they werecontentthatthedecision,whichtheymustmakeatlatest when they came to Rauros and the Tindrock Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let the River bear them on at its own pace, having no desire to hasten towards the perils that lay beyond, whichever course they took in the end. Aragorn let them drift with the stream as they wished, husbanding theirstrength againstweariness tocome. Butheinsisted that at least they should start early each day and journey on far intotheevening;forhefeltinhisheartthattimewaspressing, and he feared that the Dark Lord had not been idle while they lingered in Lo´rien. Nonetheless they saw no sign of any enemy that day, nor the next. The dull grey hours passed without event. As the third day of their voyage wore on the lands changed slowly: the trees thinned and then failed altogether. On the eastern bank to their left they saw long formless slopes stretching up and away towards the sky; brown and withered they looked, as if fire had passed over them, leaving no living blade of green: an unfriendly waste without even a broken tree or a bold stone to relieve the emptiness. They had come to the Brown Lands that lay, vast and desolate, between Southern Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence
496 the fellowship of the ring orwarorevildeedofthe Enemyhadsoblastedallthatregion even Aragorn could not tell. Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but it was flat, and in many places green with wide plains of grass. On this side of the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all view to the west, as the little boats went rustling by along their fluttering borders. Theirdarkwitheredplumesbentandtossedinthelightcold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through open- ings Frodo could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads, and far beyond them hills in the sunset, and away on the edge of sight a dark line, where marched the southernmost ranks of the Misty Mountains. There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of thesethereweremany:smallfowlwhistlingandpipinginthe reeds,buttheywereseldomseen.Onceortwicethetravellers heardtherushandwhineofswan-wings,andlookingupthey saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky. ‘Swans!’ said Sam. ‘And mighty big ones too!’ ‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they are black swans.’ ‘Howwideandemptyandmournfulallthiscountrylooks!’ said Frodo. ‘I always imagined that as one journeyed south it got warmer and merrier, until winter was left behind for ever.’ ‘But we have not journeyed far south yet,’ answered Aragorn. ‘It is still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world is cold until the sudden spring, and we may yet have snow again. Far away down in the Bay of Belfalas, to which Anduin runs, it is warm and merry, maybe, or would bebutforthe Enemy.Butherewearenotabovesixtyleagues, I guess, south of the Southfarthing away in your Shire, hun- dreds of long miles yonder. You are looking now south-west acrossthenorthplainsofthe Riddermark,Rohanthelandof the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River. That is the north boundary of Rohan; and of old all thatlaybetween Limlightandthe White Mountainsbelonged
the great river 497 to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and pleasant land, and its grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the River or ride often to its shores. Anduin is wide, yet the orcs can shoot their arrows far across the stream; and of late, it is said, they have dared to cross the water and raid the herds and studs of Rohan.’ Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had seemed hostile before, as if they harboured secret eyes and lurkingdangers;nowhewishedthatthetreeswerestillthere. He feltthat the Company wastoo naked,afloat inlittle open boatsinthemidstofshelterlesslands,andonariverthatwas the frontier of war. In the next day or two, as they went on, borne steadily southwards, this feeling of insecurity grew on all the Com- pany.Forawholedaytheytooktotheirpaddlesandhastened forward. The banks slid by. Soon the River broadened and grewmoreshallow;longstonybeacheslayupontheeast,and there were gravel-shoals in the water, so that careful steering was needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, over which flowed a chill air from the East. On the other side the meads had become rolling downs of withered grass amidst a landoffenandtussock.Frodoshivered,thinkingofthelawns and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlo´rien. There was little speech and no laughter in any of the boats. Each member of the Company was busy with his own thoughts. The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summernightinsomenortherngladeamidthebeech-woods; Gimli was fingering gold in his mind, and wondering if it were fit to be wrought into the housing of the Lady’s gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizingapaddleanddrivingtheboatclosebehind Aragorn’s. Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking back, caught a queergleaminhiseye,ashepeeredforwardgazingat Frodo. Samhadlongagomadeuphismindthat,thoughboatswere
498 the fellowship of the ring maybenotasdangerousashehadbeenbroughtuptobelieve, they were far more uncomfortable than even he had imag- ined. He was cramped and miserable, having nothing to do but stare at the winter-lands crawling by and the grey water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use they did not trust Sam with one. As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowed heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the followingboats;hewasdrowsyandlongedforcampandthe feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught his sight: at first he stared at it listlessly, then he sat up and rubbed his eyes; but when he looked again he could not see it any more. Thatnighttheycampedonasmalleyotclosetothewestern bank.Samlayrolledinblanketsbeside Frodo.‘Ihadafunny dream an hour or two before we stopped, Mr. Frodo,’ he said. ‘Or maybe it wasn’t a dream. Funny it was anyway.’ ‘Well, what was it?’ said Frodo, knowing that Sam would not settle down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. ‘I haven’t seen or thought of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlo´rien.’ ‘It wasn’t funny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was queer. All wrong, if it wasn’t a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with eyes!’ ‘The log’s all right,’ said Frodo. ‘There are many in the River. But leave out the eyes!’ ‘That I won’t,’ said Sam. ‘’Twas the eyes as made me sit up, so to speak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half-light behind Gimli’s boat; but I didn’t give much heed to it. Then it seemed as if the log was slowly catching us up. And that was peculiar, as you might say, seeing as we were all floating on the stream together. Just then I saw the eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a hump at the near end of the log. What’s more, it wasn’t a log, for it had paddle-feet, like a swan’s almost, only they seemed bigger, and kept dipping in and out of the water.
the great river 499 ‘That’s when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes, meaning to give a shout, if it was still there when I had rubbed the drowseoutofmyhead.Forthewhatever-it-waswascoming along fast now and getting close behind Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whether I came to my senses, I don’t know. When I looked again, it wasn’t there. Yet I think I caught a glimpse, with the tail of my eye, as the saying is, of something dark shooting under theshadowofthebank.Icouldn’tseenomoreeyes,though. ‘I said to myself: ‘‘dreaming again, Sam Gamgee,’’ I said; and I said no more just then. But I’ve been thinking since, and now I’m not so sure. What do you make of it, Mr. Frodo?’ ‘I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleepinyoureyes,Sam,’said Frodo,‘ifthiswasthefirsttime that those eyes had been seen. But it isn’t. I saw them away back north before we reached Lo´rien. And I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night. Haldir saw it too. And do you remember the report of the Elves that went after the orc-band?’ ‘Ah,’ said Sam, ‘I do; and I remember more too. I don’t likemy thoughts;butthinking ofonething andanother,and Mr.Bilbo’s storiesandall, Ifancy I couldputa nameonthe creature, at a guess. A nasty name. Gollum, maybe?’ ‘Yes,thatiswhat Ihavefearedforsometime,’said Frodo. ‘Ever since the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and picked up our trail then; but I hoped that our stay in Lo´rien would throw him off the scent again. The miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods by the Silverlode, watching us start off!’ ‘That’saboutit,’said Sam.‘Andwe’dbetterbeabitmore watchfulourselves,orwe’llfeelsomenastyfingersroundour necksoneofthesenights,ifweeverwakeuptofeelanything. And that’s what I was leading up to. No need to trouble Strider or the others tonight. I’ll keep watch. I can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.’
500 the fellowship of the ring ‘Imight,’said Frodo,‘and Imightsay‘‘luggagewitheyes’’. Youshallwatch;butonlyifyoupromisetowakemehalf-way towards morning, if nothing happens before then.’ In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to find Sam shakinghim.‘It’s ashameto wakeyou,’whispered Sam,‘butthat’swhatyousaid.There’snothingtotell,ornot much. I thought I heard some soft plashing and a sniffing noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such queer sounds by a river at night.’ He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets, andfoughtoffhissleep.Minutesorhourspassedslowly,and nothinghappened.Frodowasjustyieldingtothetemptation to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly visible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes shone coldly as they peered inside, and then they lifted and gazed up at Frodo on the eyot. They werenotmorethanayardortwoaway,and Frodoheardthe soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from its sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut off. There was another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot away downstream into the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up. ‘What is it?’ he whispered, springing up and coming to Frodo. ‘I felt something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword?’ ‘Gollum,’ answered Frodo. ‘Or at least, so I guess.’ ‘Ah!’ said Aragorn. ‘So you know about our little footpad, doyou?Hepaddedafterusallthrough Moriaandrightdown to Nimrodel. Since we took to boats, he has been lying on a log and paddling with hands and feet. I have tried to catch him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox, and as slippery as a fish. I hoped the river-voyage would beat him, but he is too clever a waterman. ‘Weshall haveto trygoingfaster tomorrow.Youlie down now,and Iwillkeepwatchforwhatisleftofthenight.Iwish
the great river 501 I could lay my hands on the wretch. We might make him useful. But if I cannot, we shall have to try and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on his own account, he may put any enemy that is about on our track.’ The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a shadowagain.Afterthatthe Companykeptasharplook-out, but they saw no more of Gollum while the voyage lasted. If he was still following, he was very wary and cunning. At Aragorn’s bidding they paddled now for long spells, and the banks went swiftly by. But they saw little of the country, for they journeyed mostly by night and twilight, resting by day, and lying as hidden as the land allowed. In this way the time passed without event until the seventh day. Theweatherwasstillgreyandovercast,withwindfromthe East, but as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and pools of faint light, yellow and pale green, opened underthe greyshores of cloud.There thewhite rind of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote lakes. Sam looked at it and puckered his brows. The next day the country on either side began to change rapidly. The banks began to rise and grow stony. Soon they were passing through a hilly rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes buried in deep brakes of thorn and sloe,tangledwithbramblesandcreepers.Behindthemstood low crumbling cliffs, and chimneys of grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and beyond these again there rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen firs. They were drawing near to the grey hill-country of the Emyn Muil, the southern march of Wilderland. There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock- chimneys,andalldayhighintheairflocksofbirdshadbeen circling, black against the pale sky. As they lay in their camp that day Aragorn watched the flights doubtfully, wondering if Gollum had been doing some mischief and the news of their voyage was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the
502 the fellowship of the ring sun was setting, and the Company was stirring and getting readytostartagain,hedescriedadarkspotagainstthefading light: a great bird high and far off, now wheeling, now flying on slowly southwards. ‘What is that, Legolas?’ he asked, pointing to the northern sky. ‘Is it, as I think, an eagle?’ ‘Yes,’said Legolas.‘Itisaneagle,ahuntingeagle.Iwonder what that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.’ ‘We will not start until it is fully dark,’ said Aragorn. The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless;thegreyeastwindhadpassedaway.Thethincres- cent of the Moon had fallen early into the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and though far away in the South thereweregreatrangesofcloudthatstillshonefaintly,inthe West stars glinted bright. ‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will venture one more journey bynight.Wearecomingtoreachesofthe Riverthat Idonot knowwell;for Ihaveneverjourneyedbywaterintheseparts before, not between here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning, those are still many miles ahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come there: rocks and stony eyots in the stream. We must keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle swiftly.’ To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watch- man.Helayforwardpeeringintothegloom.Thenightgrew dark,butthestarsabovewerestrangelybright,andtherewas aglimmeronthefaceofthe River.Itwascloseonmidnight, and they had been drifting for some while, hardly using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out. Only a few yards aheaddarkshapesloomedupinthestreamandheheardthe swirlofracingwater.Therewasaswiftcurrentwhichswung left, towards the eastern shore where the channel was clear. As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now very close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were thrust out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth. The boats were all huddled together.
the great river 503 ‘Hoy there, Aragorn!’ shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped into the leader. ‘This is madness! We cannot dare the Rapids by night! But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.’ ‘Back, back!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Turn! Turn if you can!’ He drove his paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round. ‘I am out of my reckoning,’ he said to Frodo. ‘I did not know that we had come so far: Anduin flows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir must be close at hand already.’ With great efforts they checked the boats and slowly brought them about; but at first they could make only small headway against the current, and all the time they were carriednearerandnearerto theeasternbank.Nowdarkand ominous it loomed up in the night. ‘All together, paddle!’ shouted Boromir. ‘Paddle! Or we shall be driven on the shoals.’ Even as he spoke Frodo felt the keel beneath him grate upon stone. At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistled over them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo between the shoulders and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell back, foiled by his hidden coat of mail. Another passed through Aragorn’s hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry’s hand. Sam thought he could glimpse black figures running to and fro upon the long shingle-banks thatlay underthe eastern shore.They seemed very near. ‘Yrch!’ said Legolas, falling into his own tongue. ‘Orcs!’ cried Gimli. ‘Gollum’s doing, I’ll be bound,’ said Sam to Frodo. ‘And aniceplacetochoose,too.The Riverseemssetontakingus right into their arms!’ Theyallleanedforwardstrainingatthepaddles:even Sam took a hand. Every moment they expected to feel the bite of black-featheredarrows.Manywhinedoverheadorstruckthe
504 the fellowship of the ring water nearby; but there were no more hits. It was dark, but not too dark for the night-eyes of Orcs, and in the star- glimmer they must have offered their cunning foes some mark, unless it was that the grey cloaks of Lo´rien and the grey timber of the elf-wrought boats defeated the malice of the archers of Mordor. Stroke by stroke they laboured on. In the darkness it was hardtobesurethattheywereindeedmovingatall;butslowly theswirlofthewatergrewless,andtheshadowoftheeastern bank faded back into the night. At last, as far as they could judge, they had reached the middle of the stream again and had driven their boats back some distance above the jutting rocks. Then half turning they thrust them with all their strength towards the western shore. Under the shadow of bushes leaning out over the water they halted and drew breath. Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he had brought from Lo´rien. Then he sprang ashore and climbed a few paces up the bank. Stringing the bow and fitting an arrow he turned, peering back over the River into the darkness. Across the water there were shrill cries, but nothing could be seen. Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above him, as he gazed into the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head wasdark,crownedwithsharpwhitestarsthatglitteredinthe black pools of the sky behind. But now rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds advanced, sending out dark outriders into the starry fields. A sudden dread fell on the Company. ‘Elbereth Gilthoniel!’ sighed Legolas as he looked up. Even as he did so, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud, for it moved far more swiftly, came out of the blackness in the South, and sped towards the Company, blotting out all light as it approached. Soon it appeared as a great winged creature,blackerthanthepitsinthenight.Fiercevoicesrose uptogreetitfromacrossthewater.Frodofeltasuddenchill running through him and clutching at his heart; there was a
the great river 505 deadlycold,likethememoryofanoldwound,inhisshoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide. Suddenly the great bow of Lo´rien sang. Shrill went the arrow from the elven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above him the winged shape swerved. There was a harsh croaking scream,asitfelloutoftheair,vanishingdownintothegloom of the eastern shore. The sky was clean again. There was a tumult of many voices far away, cursing and wailing in the darkness, and then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night. After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt their way along the water’s edge for some distance, until they found a small shallow bay. A few low trees grew there close to the water, and behind them rose a steep rocky bank. Here the Company decided to stay and await the dawn: it was useless to attempt to move further by night. They made nocampandlitnofire,butlayhuddledintheboats,moored close together. ‘Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas!’said Gimli,ashemunchedawaferoflembas.‘That was a mighty shot in the dark, my friend!’ ‘But who can say what it hit?’ said Legolas. ‘Icannot,’said Gimli.‘But Iamgladthattheshadowcame no nearer. I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria – the shadow of the Balrog,’ he ended in a whisper. ‘It was not a Balrog,’ said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that had come upon him. ‘It was something colder. I think it was——’ Then he paused and fell silent. ‘What do you think?’asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from hisboat,asifhewastryingtocatchaglimpseof Frodo’sface. ‘I think—No, I will not say,’ answered Frodo. ‘Whatever it was, its fall has dismayed our enemies.’ ‘So it seems,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet where they are, and how many, and what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all be sleepless! Dark hides us now. But what
506 the fellowship of the ring the day will show who can tell? Have your weapons close to hand!’ Samsattappingthehiltofhisswordasifhewerecounting on his fingers, and looking up at the sky. ‘It’s very strange,’ he murmured. ‘The Moon’s the same in the Shire and in Wilderland,oritoughttobe.Buteitherit’soutofitsrunning, or I’m all wrong in my reckoning. You’ll remember, Mr. Frodo, the Moon was waning as we lay on the flet up in that tree: a week from the full, I reckon. And we’d been a week on the way last night, when up pops a New Moon as thin as a nail-paring, as if we had never stayed no time in the Elvish country. ‘Well, I can remember three nights there for certain, and I seem to remember several more, but I would take my oath it wasneverawholemonth. Anyonewouldthinkthattimedid not count in there!’ ‘And perhaps that was the way of it,’ said Frodo. ‘In that land, maybe, we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone by.Itwasnot,Ithink,until Silverlodeboreusbackto Anduin that we returned to the time that flows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don’t remember any moon, either new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun by day.’ Legolasstirredinhisboat.‘Nay,timedoesnottarryever,’ hesaid;‘butchangeandgrowthisnotinallthingsandplaces alike. For the Elves the world moves, and itmoves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because they themselves change little,andallelsefleetsby:itisagrieftothem.Slow,because they need not count the running years, not for themselves. Thepassingseasonsarebutrippleseverrepeatedinthelong long stream. Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.’ ‘Butthewearingisslowin Lo´rien,’said Frodo.‘Thepower of the Lady is on it. Rich are the hours, though short they seem, in Caras Galadhon, where Galadriel wields the Elven- ring.’
the great river 507 ‘That should not have been said outside Lo´rien, not even tome,’said Aragorn.‘Speaknomore ofit!Butsoit is,Sam: in that land you lost your count. There time flowed swiftly by us, as for the Elves. The old moon passed, and a new moonwaxedandwanedintheworldoutside,whilewetarried there. And yestereve a new moon came again. Winter is nearly gone. Time flows on to a spring of little hope.’ Thenightpassedsilently.Novoiceorcallwasheardagain acrossthewater.Thetravellershuddledintheirboatsfeltthe changing of the weather. The air grew warm and very still under the great moist clouds that had floated up from the South and the distant seas. The rushing of the River over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow louder and closer. The twigs of the trees above them began to drip. Whenthedaycamethemoodoftheworldaboutthemhad become soft and sad. Slowly the dawn grew to a pale light, diffused and shadowless. There was mist on the River, and whitefogswathedtheshore;thefarbankcouldnotbeseen. ‘I can’t abide fog,’ said Sam; ‘but this seems to be a lucky one. Now perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.’ ‘Perhaps so,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it will be hard to find the pathunlessthefogliftsalittlelateron.Andwemustfindthe path, if we are to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.’ ‘I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the Riveranyfurther,’said Boromir.‘Ifthe Emyn Muilliebefore us,thenwecanabandonthesecockle-boats,andstrikewest- wardandsouthward,untilwecometothe Entwashandcross into my own land.’ ‘Wecan,ifwearemakingfor Minas Tirith,’said Aragorn, ‘but that is not yet agreed. And such a course may be more perilousthanitsounds.Thevaleof Entwashisflatandfenny, and fog is a deadly peril there for those on foot and laden. I would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is at least a path that cannot be missed.’
508 the fellowship of the ring ‘Butthe Enemyholdstheeasternbank,’objected Boromir. ‘And even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the Tindrock, what will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes?’ ‘No!’ answered Aragorn. ‘Say rather that we will bear our boats by the ancient way to Rauros-foot, and there take to thewateragain.Doyounotknow,Boromir,ordoyouchoose toforgetthe North Stair,andthehighseatupon Amon Hen, that were made in the days of the great kings? I at least have a mind to stand in that high place again, before I decide my further course. There, maybe, we shall see some sign that will guide us.’ Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it becameplain that Frodowouldfollow Aragorn,whereverhe went, he gave in. ‘It is not the way of the Men of Minas Tirith to desert their friends at need,’ he said, ‘and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There I shall turn to my home, alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.’ The day was now growing, and the fog had lifted a little. It was decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the shore, while the others remained by the boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by which they could carry both their boats and their baggage to the smoother water beyond the Rapids. ‘Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,’ he said, ‘but that does not say that we should come through Sarn Gebir alive.Nonehaveeverdonesoyet.Noroadwasmadebythe Men of Gondor in this region, for even in their great days theirrealmdidnotreachup Anduinbeyondthe Emyn Muil; but there is a portage-way somewhere on the western shore, if I can find it. It cannot yet have perished; for light boats usedtojourneyoutof Wilderlanddownto Osgiliath,andstill didsountilafewyearsago,whenthe Orcsof Mordorbegan to multiply.’
the great river 509 ‘Seldominmylifehasanyboatcomeoutofthe North,and the Orcsprowlontheeast-shore,’said Boromir.‘Ifyougofor- ward,perilwillgrowwitheverymile,evenifyoufindapath.’ ‘Peril lies ahead on every southward road,’ answered Aragorn. ‘Wait for us one day. If we do not return in that time, you will know that evil has indeed befallen us. Then you must take a new leader and follow him as best you can.’ It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb the steep bank and vanish into the mists; but his fears proved groundless. Only two or three hours had passed,anditwasbarelymid-day,whentheshadowyshapes of the explorers appeared again. ‘Alliswell,’said Aragorn,asheclambereddownthebank. ‘There is a track, and it leads to a good landing that is still serviceable.Thedistanceisnotgreat:theheadofthe Rapids is but half a mile below us, and they are little more than a mile long. Not far beyond them the stream becomes clear and smooth again, though it runs swiftly. Our hardest task will be to get our boats and baggage to the old portage-way. We have found it, but it lies well back from the water-side here,andrunsundertheleeofarock-wall,afurlongormore fromtheshore.Wedidnotfindwherethenorthwardlanding lies.Ifitstillremains,wemusthavepassedityesterdaynight. We might labour far upstream and yet miss it in the fog. I fearwemustleavethe Rivernow,andmakefortheportage- way as best we can from here.’ ‘That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,’ said Boromir. ‘Yet such as we are we will try it,’ said Aragorn. ‘Aye, we will,’ said Gimli. ‘The legs of Men will lag on a rough road, while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir!’ The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The goods were taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank, where there was a level space. Then the boatsweredrawnoutofthewaterandcarriedup.Theywere
510 the fellowship of the ring far less heavy than any had expected. Of what tree growing inthe Elvishcountrytheyweremadenoteven Legolasknew; but the wood was tough and yet strangely light. Merry and Pippin alone could carry their boat with ease along the flat. Nonethelessitneededthestrengthofthetwo Mentoliftand haul them over the ground that the Company now had to cross. It sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of grey limestone-boulders, with many hidden holes shrouded with weeds and bushes; there were thickets of brambles, and sheer dells; and here and there boggy pools fed by waters trickling from the terraces further inland. One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats, while the otherstoiled and scrambledafter them withthe baggage. At last all was removed and laid on the portage-way. Then with little further hindrance, save from sprawling briars and manyfallenstones,theymovedforwardalltogether.Fogstill hung in veils upon the crumbling rock-wall, and to their left mist shrouded the River: they could hear it rushing and foamingoverthesharpshelvesandstonyteethof Sarn Gebir, buttheycouldnotseeit.Twicetheymadethejourney,before all was brought safe to the southern landing. Theretheportage-way,turningbacktothewater-side,ran gently down to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been scooped in the river-side, not by hand, but by the water swirling down from Sarn Gebir against a low pier of rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond it the shore rose sheer into a grey cliff, and there was no further passage for those on foot. Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was closing in. They sat beside the water listening to theconfused rushand roarof the Rapidshidden inthe mist; they were tired and sleepy, and their hearts were as gloomy as the dying day. ‘Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,’ said Boromir. ‘We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all too tired – except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.’
the great river 511 Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat. ‘Let us rest as much as we can now,’ said Aragorn. ‘Tomorrow we must journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us, we shall have a good chance of slipping through, unseen by any eyes on the eastern shore. But tonight two must watch together in turns: three hours off and one on guard.’ Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of rain an hour before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already the fog was thinning. They kept as close as they could to the western side, and they could see the dim shapesofthelowcliffsrisingeverhigher,shadowywallswith theirfeetinthehurryingriver.Inthemid-morningtheclouds drew down lower, and it began to rain heavily. They drew the skin-covers over their boats to prevent them from being flooded, and drifted on; little could be seen before them or about them through the grey falling curtains. The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly the sky above grew lighter, and then suddenly the clouds broke, and their draggled fringes trailed away northward up the River. The fogs and mists were gone. Before the travellers lay a wide ravine, with great rocky sides to which clung, upon shelves andinnarrowcrevices,afewthrawntrees.Thechannelgrew narrower and the River swifter. Now they were speeding along with little hope of stopping or turning, whatever they might meet ahead. Over them was a lane of pale-blue sky, aroundthemthedarkovershadowed River,andbeforethem black, shutting out the sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in which no opening could be seen. Frodopeeringforwardsawinthedistancetwogreatrocks approaching: like great pinnacles or pillars of stone they seemed. Tall and sheer and ominous they stood upon either side of the stream. A narrow gap appeared between them, and the River swept the boats towards it. ‘Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings!’ cried Aragorn. ‘We shall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line,
512 the fellowship of the ring and as far apart as you can! Hold the middle of the stream!’ As Frodo was borne towards them the great pillars rose liketowerstomeethim.Giantstheyseemedtohim,vastgrey figures silent but threatening. Then he saw that they were indeedshapedandfashioned:thecraftandpowerofoldhad wroughtuponthem,andstilltheypreservedthroughthesuns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which they had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded in the deep waters stood two great kings of stone: still with blurred eyes and crannied brows they frowned upon the North. The left hand of each was raised palm outwards in gesture of warning;ineachrighthandtherewasanaxe;uponeachhead there was a crumbling helm and crown. Great power and majesty they still wore, the silent wardens of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon Frodo, and he cowered down,shuttinghiseyesandnotdaringtolookupastheboat drewnear.Even Boromirbowedhisheadastheboatswhirled by, frail and fleeting as little leaves, under the enduring shadowofthesentinelsof Nu´menor.Sotheypassedintothe dark chasm of the Gates. Sheerrosethedreadfulcliffstounguessedheightsoneither side. Far off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed over them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front muttering and groaning: ‘What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of this boat, and I’ll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river!’ ‘Fear not!’ said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned and saw Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no longer there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding the boat with skilful strokes;hishoodwascastback,andhisdarkhairwasblowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to his own land. ‘Fear not!’ he said. ‘Long have I desired to look upon the likenessesof Isildurand Ana´rion,mysiresofold.Undertheir shadow Elessar, the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House
the great river 513 of Valandil Isildur’sson,heirof Elendil,hasnaughttodread!’ Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: ‘Would that Gandalf were here! How my heart yearns for Minas Anor and the walls of my own city! But whither now shall I go?’ The chasm was long and dark, and filled with the noise of windandrushingwaterandechoingstone.Itbentsomewhat towards the west so that at first all was dark ahead; but soon Frodosawatallgapoflightbeforehim,evergrowing.Swiftly it drew near, and suddenly the boats shot through, out into a wide clear light. Thesun,alreadylongfallenfromthenoon,wasshiningin a windy sky. The pent waters spread out into a long oval lake,pale Nen Hithoel,fencedbysteepgreyhillswhosesides werecladwithtrees,buttheirheadswerebare,cold-gleaming in the sunlight. At the far southern end rose three peaks. The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered from them, an island in the waters, about which the flowing River flung pale shimmering arms. Distant but deep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the roll of thunder heard far away. ‘Behold Tol Brandir!’ said Aragorn, pointing south to the tall peak. ‘Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen, the Hills of Hearing and of Sight. In the days of the great kings there were high seats upon them, and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of man or beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere the shade of night falls we shall come to them. I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling.’ The Company rested now for a while, drifting south on the current that flowed through the middle of the lake. They ate some food, and then they took to their paddles and hastened on their way. The sides of the westward hills fell into shadow, and the Sun grew round and red. Here and thereamistystarpeeredout.Thethreepeaksloomedbefore them,darklinginthetwilight.Rauroswasroaringwithagreat
514 the fellowship of the ring voice.Alreadynightwaslaidontheflowingwaterswhenthe travellers came at last under the shadow of the hills. The tenth day of their journey was over. Wilderland was behind them. They could go no further without choice between the east-way and the west. The last stage of the Quest was before them.
Chapter 10 THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River. Here upon its western side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from the feet of Amon Hen. Behinditrosethefirstgentleslopesofthehillcladwithtrees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass. ‘Here we will rest tonight,’ said Aragorn. ‘This is the lawn of Parth Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope that no evil has yet come here.’ They drew up their boats on the green banks, and beside them they made their camp. They set a watch, but had no sightnorsound oftheirenemies.If Gollumhadcontrivedto follow them, he remained unseen and unheard. Nonetheless as the night wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in his sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn it was to watch. ‘Whyareyouwaking?’asked Frodo.‘Itisnotyourwatch.’ ‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn; ‘but a shadow and a threathasbeengrowinginmysleep.Itwouldbewelltodraw your sword.’ ‘Why?’ said Frodo. ‘Are enemies at hand?’ ‘Let us see what Sting may show,’ answered Aragorn. Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dis- may the edges gleamed dimly in the night. ‘Orcs!’ he said. ‘Not very near, and yet too near, it seems.’ ‘I feared as much,’ said Aragorn. ‘But maybe they are not on this side of the River. The light of Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than spies of Mordor roaming on the slopes of Amon Lhaw. I have never heard before of Orcs
516 the fellowship of the ring upon Amon Hen.Yetwhoknowswhatmayhappeninthese evil days, now that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of Anduin. We must go warily tomorrow.’ The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars of cloud like the fumes of a great burning. The rising sun lit them from beneath with flames of murky red; but soon it climbed above them into a clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with gold. Frodo looked out eastward and gazed at the tall island. Its sides sprang sheer out of the running water. High up above the tall cliffs were steep slopes upon which trees climbed, mounting one head above another; and above them again were grey faces ofinaccessiblerock,crownedbyagreatspireofstone.Many birdswerecirclingaboutit,butnosignofotherlivingthings could be seen. When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. ‘The day has come at last,’ he said: ‘the day of choice which we have long delayed. What shall now become ofour Company thathastravelledso farinfellowship?Shall weturnwestwith Boromirandgotothewarsof Gondor;or turn east to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and that as each may choose? Whatever we do must be done soon. We cannot long halt here.Theenemyisontheeasternshore,weknow;but Ifear that the Orcs may already be on this side of the water.’ Therewasalongsilenceinwhichnoonespokeormoved. ‘Well, Frodo,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘I fear that the burden islaiduponyou.Youarethe Bearerappointedbythe Coun- cil. Your own way you alone can choose. In this matter I cannotadviseyou.Iamnot Gandalf,andthough Ihavetried to bear his part, I do not know what design or hope he had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems that if he were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.’ Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. ‘I know that haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden
the breaking of the fellowship 517 is heavy. Give me an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me be alone!’ Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. ‘Very well, Frodo son of Drogo,’ he said. ‘You shall have an hour, and you shallbealone.Wewillstayhereforawhile.Butdonotstray far or out of call.’ Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had been watching his master with great concern, shook his headandmuttered:‘Plainasapikestaffitis,butit’snogood Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.’ Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while the others restrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes of Boromir followed Frodo intently, until he passed out of sight in the trees at the foot of Amon Hen. Wanderingaimlesslyatfirstinthewood,Frodofoundthat his feet were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill. Hecametoapath,thedwindlingruinsofaroadoflongago. In steep places stairs of stone had been hewn, but now they were cracked and worn, and split by the roots of trees. For some while he climbed, not caring which way he went, until hecametoagrassyplace.Rowan-treesgrewaboutit,andin the midst was a wide flat stone. The little upland lawn was openuponthe Eastandwasfillednowwiththeearlysunlight. Frodo halted and looked out over the River, far below him, to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air between him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros was a mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom. He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands, staring eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo left the Shire was passing through his mind, and he recalled and pondered everything that he could remember of Gandalf’s words. Time went on, and still he was no nearer to a choice. Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling cametohimthatsomethingwasbehindhim,thatunfriendly eyes were upon him. He sprang up and turned; but all that
518 the fellowship of the ring he saw to his surprise was Boromir, and his face was smiling and kind. ‘I was afraid for you, Frodo,’ he said, coming forward. ‘If Aragorn is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should wander alone, andyou least of all: so muchdepends on you. And my heart too is heavy. May I stay now and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would comfort me. Where there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together may perhaps find wisdom.’ ‘You are kind,’ answered Frodo. ‘But I do not think that any speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid of doing it, Boromir: afraid.’ Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The windmurmuredinthebranchesofthetrees.Frodoshivered. Suddenly Boromircameandsatbesidehim.‘Areyousure thatyoudonotsufferneedlessly?’hesaid.‘Iwishtohelpyou. Youneedcounselinyourhardchoice.Willyounottakemine?’ ‘I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,’ said Frodo. ‘And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.’ ‘Warning? Warning against what?’ said Boromir sharply. ‘Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against refusal of the burden that is laid on me. Against – well, if it mustbe said,against trustin thestrengthand truthof Men.’ ‘Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your little country, though you knew it not.’ ‘Idonotdoubtthevalourofyourpeople.Buttheworldis changing.Thewallsof Minas Tirithmaybestrong,butthey are not strong enough. If they fail, what then?’ ‘We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that they will not fail.’ ‘No hope while the Ring lasts,’ said Frodo. ‘Ah!The Ring!’said Boromir,hiseyeslighting.‘The Ring! Isitnotastrangefatethatweshouldsuffersomuchfearand doubtforsosmallathing?Sosmallathing!And Ihaveseen itonlyforaninstantinthehouseof Elrond.Could Inothave a sight of it again?’
the breaking of the fellowship 519 Frodolookedup.Hisheartwentsuddenlycold.Hecaught thestrangegleamin Boromir’seyes,yethisfacewasstillkind andfriendly.‘Itisbestthatitshouldliehidden,’heanswered. ‘As you wish. I care not,’ said Boromir. ‘Yet may I not evenspeakofit?Foryouseemevertothinkonlyofitspower in the hands of the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good. The world is changing, you say. Minas Tirith will fall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly, if the Ring were with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us?’ ‘Were you not at the Council?’ answered Frodo. ‘Because we cannot use it, and what is done with it turns to evil.’ Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. ‘So you go on,’ he cried. ‘Gandalf, Elrond – all these folk have taught youto sayso.Forthemselves theymayberight. Theseelves andhalf-elvesandwizards,theywouldcometogriefperhaps. Yet often I doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they will not be corrupted. We of Minas Tirith have been staunch through long years of trial. We do not desire the power of wizard- lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in a just cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the Ring of Power. Itis a gift,I say;a gift tothe foesof Mordor. Itismadnottouseit,tousethepowerofthe Enemyagainst him. The fearless, the ruthless, these alone will achieve vic- tory.Whatcouldnotawarriordointhishour,agreatleader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why not Boromir? The Ring would give me power of Command. How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!’ Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly. Almost he seemed to have forgotten Frodo, while his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the mustering of men; and he drew plans for great alliances and glorious victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself a mighty king, benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms. ‘And they tell us to throw it away!’ he cried. ‘I do not say
520 the fellowship of the ring destroyit.Thatmightbewell,ifreasoncouldshowanyhope of doing so. It does not. The only plan that is proposed to us is that a halfling should walk blindly into Mordor and offer the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for himself. Folly! ‘Surely you see it, my friend?’ he said, turning now sud- denly to Frodo again. ‘You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldestshould pardon you. Butis it notreally your good sense that revolts?’ ‘No,Iamafraid,’said Frodo.‘Simplyafraid.But Iamglad to have heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.’ ‘Then you will come to Minas Tirith?’ cried Boromir. His eyes were shining and his face eager. ‘You misunderstand me,’ said Frodo. ‘Butyouwillcome,atleastforawhile?’Boromirpersisted. ‘My city is not far now; and it is little further from there to Mordorthanfromhere.Wehavebeenlonginthewilderness, and you need news of what the Enemy is doing before you makeamove.Comewithme,Frodo,’hesaid.‘Youneedrest beforeyourventure,ifgoyoumust.’Helaidhishandonthe hobbit’sshoulderinfriendlyfashion;but Frodofeltthehand trembling with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength. ‘Why are you so unfriendly?’ said Boromir. ‘I am a true man, neither thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but I give you my word that I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at least let me make trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring!’ ‘No! no!’ cried Frodo. ‘The Council laid it upon me to bear it.’ ‘It isby ourown folly thatthe Enemywill defeat us,’cried Boromir. ‘How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death and ruining our cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is the men of Nu´menor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me!’
the breaking of the fellowship 521 Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great flat stone stood between them. ‘Come, come, my friend!’ said Boromirinasoftervoice.‘Whynotgetridofit?Whynotbe free of your doubt and fear? You can lay the blame on me, if you will. You can say that I was too strong and took it by force. For I am too strong for you, halfling,’ he cried; and suddenly he sprang over the stone and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face was hideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes. Frodododgedasideandagainputthestonebetweenthem. There was only one thing he could do: trembling he pulled out the Ring upon its chain and quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him again. The Man gasped, stared for a moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking here and there among the rocks and trees. ‘Miserabletrickster!’heshouted.‘Letmegetmyhandson you! Now I see your mind. You will take the Ring to Sauron and sell us all. You have only waited your chance to leave us in the lurch. Curse you and all halflings to death and dark- ness!’ Then, catching his foot on a stone, he fell sprawling andlayuponhisface.Forawhilehewasasstillasifhisown curse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept. He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away the tears. ‘What have I said?’ he cried. ‘What have I done? Frodo, Frodo!’ he called. ‘Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back!’ There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was already far away, leaping blindly up the path to the hill-top. Terror and grief shook him, seeing in his thought the mad fierce face of Boromir, and his burning eyes. Soonhecameoutaloneonthesummitof Amon Hen,and halted, gasping for breath. He saw as through a mist a wide flat circle, paved with mighty flags, and surrounded with a crumbling battlement; and in the middle, set upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many steps.Uphewentandsatupontheancientchair,feelinglike
522 the fellowship of the ring alostchildthathadclambereduponthethroneofmountain- kings. At first he could see little. He seemed to be in a world of mist in which there were only shadows: the Ring was upon him. Then here and there the mist gave way and he saw many visions: small and clear as if they were under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright living images. The world seemed to have shrunk and fallensilent.Hewassittinguponthe Seatof Seeing,on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men of Nu´menor. Eastward he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great Riverlaylikearibbonbeneathhim,andthe Misty Mountains stood small and hard as broken teeth. Westward he looked and saw the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below his very feet the Great River curled like a toppling wave and plunged over the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the fume. And Ethir Anduinhesaw,themightydeltaofthe River,and myriads of sea-birds whirling like a white dust in the sun, and beneath them a green and silver sea, rippling in endless lines. But everywhere he looked he saw the signs of war. The Misty Mountainswerecrawlinglikeanthills:orcswereissuing out of a thousand holes. Under the boughs of Mirkwood therewasdeadlystrifeof Elvesand Menandfellbeasts.The land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria; smoke rose on the borders of Lo´rien. Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves poured from Isengard. From the havens of Harad ships of war put out to sea; and out of the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon horses, chariots of chieftains and laden wains. All the power of the Dark Lordwasinmotion.Thenturningsouthagainhebeheld Minas Tirith.Farawayitseemed,andbeautiful:white-walled, many-towered, proud and fair upon its mountain-seat; its
the breaking of the fellowship 523 battlementsglitteredwithsteel,anditsturretswerebrightwith many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith was set another fortress, greater and more strong. Thither, eastward, unwilling his eye was drawn. It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the grinning gates of Minas Morgul, and the haunted Mountains, and it looked upon Gorgoroth,thevalleyofterrorinthe Landof Mordor.Dark- ness lay there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, and a great reek rising. Then at last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, battlement upon battlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, gateofsteel,towerofadamant,hesawit:Barad-duˆr,Fortress of Sauron. All hope left him. And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the Dark Tower that did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze. A fierce eager will was there. It leaped towardshim;almostlikeafingerhefeltit,searchingforhim. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where hewas.Amon Lhawittouched.Itglancedupon Tol Brandir – he threw himself from the seat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood. Heheardhimselfcryingout:Never,never!Orwasit:Verily Icome, Icome toyou? Hecould nottell. Thenas aflash from some other point of power there came to his mind another thought: Take it off! Take it off! Fool, take it off! Take off the Ring! The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly balanced between their piercing points, he writhed, tor- mented. Suddenly he was aware of himself again, Frodo, neither the Voice nor the Eye: free to choose, and with one remaininginstantinwhichtodoso.Hetookthe Ringoffhis finger.Hewaskneelinginclearsunlightbeforethehighseat. A black shadow seemed to pass like an arm above him; it missed Amon Henandgropedoutwest,andfaded.Thenall the sky was clean and blue and birds sang in every tree. Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will was firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to
524 the fellowship of the ring himself. ‘I will do now what I must,’ he said. ‘This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at work even in the Company,andthe Ringmustleavethembeforeitdoesmore harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can trust are too dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. I will go alone. At once.’ Hewentquicklydownthepathandcamebacktothelawn where Boromirhadfoundhim.Thenhehalted,listening.He thought he could hear cries and calls from the woods near the shore below. ‘They’ll be hunting for me,’ he said. ‘I wonder how long I have been away. Hours, I should think.’ He hesitated. ‘What can I do?’ he muttered. ‘I must go now or I shall never go. I shan’t get a chance again. I hate leaving them, and like this without any explanation. But surely they will understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?’ Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He vanished and passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind. Theothersremainedlongbytheriver-side.Forsometime they had been silent, moving restlessly about; but now they weresittinginacircle,andtheyweretalking.Everynowand again they made efforts to speak of other things, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient history, and the remnantsof itsgreat works thatcould stillbe seen inthis strange border-land of the Emyn Muil: the stone kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stair beside the falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why was he hesitating? ‘Heisdebatingwhichcourseisthemostdesperate,Ithink,’ said Aragorn.‘Andwellhemay.Itisnowmorehopelessthan everforthe Companytogoeast,sincewehavebeentracked
the breaking of the fellowship 525 by Gollum, and must fear that the secret of our journey is already betrayed. But Minas Tirith is no nearer to the Fire and the destruction of the Burden. ‘Wemayremainthereforawhileandmakeabravestand; but the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keep the Burden secret,orto holdoffthe fullmightof the Enemy whenhecomestotakeit.Whichwaywouldanyofuschoose in Frodo’s place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’ ‘Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet we must needs make up our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.’ ‘And so should I,’ said Gimli. ‘We, of course, were only sent to help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than wewished;andnoneofusisunderanyoathorcommandto seek Mount Doom. Hard was my parting from Lothlo´rien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached the last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.’ ‘And I too will go with him,’ said Legolas. ‘It would be faithless now to say farewell.’ ‘It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,’ said Aragorn. ‘But if he goes east, then all need not go with him; nor do I think that all should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two, or one alone. If you would let me choose, then I should appoint three com- panions: Sam, who could not bear it otherwise; and Gimli; and myself. Boromir will return to his own city, where his father and his people need him; and with him the others should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas is not willing to leave us.’ ‘Thatwon’tdoatall!’cried Merry.‘Wecan’tleave Frodo! Pippin and I always intended to go wherever he went, and we still do. But we did not realize what that would mean. It
526 the fellowship of the ring seemed different so far away, in the Shire or in Rivendell. It would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor. Why can’t we stop him?’ ‘We must stop him,’ said Pippin. ‘And that is what he is worrying about, I am sure. He knows we shan’t agree to his goingeast.Andhedoesn’tliketoaskanyonetogowithhim, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to Mordor alone!’ Pippin shuddered. ‘But the dear silly old hobbit, he ought to know that he hasn’t got to ask. He ought to know that if we can’t stop him, we shan’t leave him.’ ‘Beggingyourpardon,’said Sam.‘Idon’tthinkyouunder- stand my master at all. He isn’t hesitating about which way to go. Of course not! What’s the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your pardon, Master Boromir,’ he added, and turned. It was then that they dis- covered that Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on the outside of the circle, was no longer there. ‘Nowwhere’shegotto?’cried Sam,lookingworried.‘He’s been a bit queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he’s not in thisbusiness.He’sofftohishome,ashealwayssaid;andno blame to him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows he’s got to find the Cracksof Doom,ifhecan.Buthe’safraid.Nowit’scometo the point, he’s just plain terrified. That’s what his trouble is. Of course he’s had a bit of schooling, so to speak – we all have–sincewelefthome,orhe’dbesoterrifiedhe’djustfling the Ringinthe Riverandbolt.Buthe’sstilltoofrightenedto start.Andheisn’tworryingaboutuseither:whetherwe’llgo along withhim orno. Heknows wemean to.That’s another thingthat’sbotheringhim.Ifhescrewshimselfuptogo,he’ll want to go alone. Mark my words! We’re going to have trouble when he comes back. For he’ll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name’s Baggins.’ ‘Ibelieveyouspeakmorewiselythananyofus,Sam,’said Aragorn. ‘And what shall we do, if you prove right?’ ‘Stop him! Don’t let him go!’ cried Pippin. ‘I wonder?’ said Aragorn. ‘He is the Bearer, and the fate of the Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to
the breaking of the fellowship 527 drivehimonewayortheother.Nordo Ithinkthatweshould succeed, if we tried. There are other powers at work far stronger.’ ‘Well, I wish Frodo would ‘‘screw himself up’’ and come back, and let us get it over,’ said Pippin. ‘This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up?’ ‘Yes,’said Aragorn.‘Thehourislongpassed.Themorning is wearing away. We must call for him.’ At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from thetreesandwalkedtowardsthemwithoutspeaking.Hisface looked grim and sad. He paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with his eyes on the ground. ‘Where have you been, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn. ‘Have you seen Frodo?’ Boromirhesitatedforasecond.‘Yes,andno,’heanswered slowly. ‘Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged him to come to Minas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and he left me. He vanished. I have never seen such a thing happen before, though I have heard of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not find him again. I thought he would return to you.’ ‘Isthatallthatyouhavetosay?’said Aragorn,lookinghard and not too kindly at Boromir. ‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘I will say no more yet.’ ‘This is bad!’ cried Sam, jumping up. ‘I don’t know what this Man has been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn’t ought to have; and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!’ ‘But he wouldn’t keep it on,’ said Merry. ‘Not when he had escaped the unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.’ ‘But where did he go? Where is he?’ cried Pippin. ‘He’s been away ages now.’ ‘How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn. ‘Half an hour, maybe,’ he answered. ‘Or it might be an
528 the fellowship of the ring hour. I have wandered for some time since. I do not know! I do not know!’ He put his head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief. ‘An hour since he vanished!’ shouted Sam. ‘We must try and find him at once. Come on!’ ‘Wait a moment!’ cried Aragorn. ‘We must divide up into pairs, and arrange – here, hold on! Wait!’ It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off first. Merry and Pippin had followed, and were already disappearing westward into the trees by the shore, shouting: Frodo! Frodo! in their clear, high, hobbit-voices. Legolasand Gimliwererunning.Asuddenpanicormadness seemed to have fallen on the Company. ‘Weshallallbescatteredandlost,’groaned Aragorn.‘Boro- mir!Idonotknowwhatpartyouhaveplayedinthismischief, but help now! Go after those two young hobbits, and guard them at the least, even if you cannot find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I shall return soon.’ Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as he reached the little lawn among the rowans he over- took him, toiling uphill, panting and calling, Frodo! ‘Come with me, Sam!’ he said. ‘None of us should be alone. There is mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top,tothe Seatof Amon Hen,toseewhatmaybeseen.And look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open!’ He sped up the path. Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger,andsoonfellbehind.Hehadnotgonefarbefore Aragorn was out of sight ahead. Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head. ‘Whoa, Sam Gamgee!’ he said aloud. ‘Your legs are too short,souseyourhead!Letmeseenow!Boromirisn’tlying, that’s not his way; but he hasn’t told us everything. Some- thing scared Mr. Frodo badly. He screwed himself up to the point, sudden. He made up his mind at last – to go. Where
the breaking of the fellowship 529 to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That’s hard, cruel hard.’ Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the tears.‘Steady,Gamgee!’hesaid.‘Think,ifyoucan!Hecan’t fly across rivers, and he can’t jump waterfalls. He’s got no gear. So he’s got to get back to the boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning!’ Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up he got and ran on. He came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen by the shore, where the boats were drawnup outof thewater.No onewasthere. Thereseemed to be cries in the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He stood gazing for a moment, stock-still, gaping. A boat was sliding down the bank all by itself. With a shout Sam raced across the grass. The boat slipped into the water. ‘Coming,Mr.Frodo!Coming!’called Sam,andflunghim- selffromthebank,clutchingatthedepartingboat.Hemissed it by a yard. With a cry and a splash he fell face downward intodeepswiftwater.Gurglinghewentunder,andthe River closed over his curly head. An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and the boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam by the hair as he came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes. ‘Up you come, Sam my lad!’ said Frodo. ‘Now take my hand!’ ‘Saveme,Mr.Frodo!’gasped Sam.‘I’mdrownded.Ican’t see your hand.’ ‘Here it is. Don’t pinch, lad! I won’t let you go. Tread water and don’t flounder, or you’ll upset the boat. There now, get hold of the side, and let me use the paddle!’ With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank, and Sam was able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. Frodo took off the Ring and stepped ashore again. ‘Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam!’ he said. ‘Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard!’ said Sam shivering. ‘That’s
530 the fellowship of the ring hard, trying to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed right, where would you be now?’ ‘Safely on my way.’ ‘Safely!’ said Sam. ‘All alone and without me to help you? I couldn’t have a borne it, it’d have been the death of me.’ ‘It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘and I could not have borne that.’ ‘Not as certain as being left behind,’ said Sam. ‘But I am going to Mordor.’ ‘I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. And I’m coming with you.’ ‘Now,Sam,’said Frodo,‘don’thinderme!Theotherswill be coming back at any minute. If they catch me here, I shall have to argue and explain, and I shall never have the heart or the chance to get off. But I must go at once. It’s the only way.’ ‘Ofcourseitis,’answered Sam.‘Butnotalone.I’mcoming too, or neither of us isn’t going. I’ll knock holes in all the boats first.’ Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touchedhisheart.‘Leaveone!’hesaid.‘We’llneedit.Butyou can’t come like this without your gear or food or anything.’ ‘Just hold on a moment, and I’ll get my stuff!’ cried Sam eagerly. ‘It’s all ready. I thought we should be off today.’ He rushed to the camping place, fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it when he emptiedthe boat of his companions’goods,grabbedaspareblanket,andsomeextra packages of food, and ran back. ‘So all my plan is spoilt!’ said Frodo. ‘It is no good trying toescapeyou.But I’mglad,Sam.Icannottellyouhowglad. Come along! It is plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don’t suppose we shall see them again.’ ‘Yet we may, Mr. Frodo. We may,’ said Sam. So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo paddled away from the shore, and the River
the breaking of the fellowship 531 bore them swiftly away, down the western arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the great falls drew nearer. Even with such help as Sam could give, it was hardworktopassacrossthecurrentatthesouthwardendof the island and drive the boat eastward towards the far shore. Atlengththeycametolandagainuponthesouthernslopes of Amon Lhaw.Theretheyfoundashelvingshore,andthey drewtheboatout,highabovethewater,andhiditaswellas they could behind a great boulder. Then shouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking a path that would bring them overthegreyhillsofthe Emyn Muil,anddownintothe Land of Shadow.
.
MAPS
2 1 4 3
1
2
3
4
ii works by j.r.r. tolkien The Hobbit Leafby Niggle On Fairy-Stories Farmer Gilesof Ham The Homecomingof Beorhtnoth The Lordofthe Rings The Adventuresof Tom Bombadil The Road Goes Ever On(with Donald Swann) Smithof Wootton Major works published posthumously Sir Gawainandthe Green Knight,Pearland Sir Orfeo The Father Christmas Letters The Silmarillion Picturesby J.R.R.Tolkien Unfinished Tales The Lettersof J.R.R.Tolkien Finnand Hengest Mr Bliss The Monstersandthe Critics&Other Essays Roverandom The Childrenof Hu´rin The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún thehistoryofmiddle-earth–bychristophertolkien IThe Bookof Lost Tales,Part One IIThe Bookof Lost Tales,Part Two IIIThe Laysof Beleriand IVThe Shapingof Middle-earth VThe Lost Roadand Other Writings VIThe Returnofthe Shadow VIIThe Treasonof Isengard VIIIThe Warofthe Ring IXSauron Defeated XMorgoth’s Ring XIThe Warofthe Jewels XIIThe Peoplesof Middle-earth
Copyright Harper Collins Publishers 77–85Fulham Palace Road, Hammersmith,London W68JB www.tolkien.co.uk www.tolkienestate.com Publishedby Harper Collins Publishers2008 1 Thiseditionisbasedonthereseteditionfirstpublished2004 Firstpublishedin Great Britainby George Allen&Unwin1954 Second Edition1966 Copyright©The Trusteesofthe J.R.R.Tolkien1967Settlement1954,1966 ® and‘Tolkien’®areregisteredtrademarksof The J.R.R.Tolkien Estate Limited AER Edition © March 2009 ISBN: 978-0-061-91767-7 All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non- exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on- screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of Harper Collins e-books.
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER Australia Harper Collins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au Canada Harper Collins Canada 2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor Toronto, ON, M4W 1A8, Canada http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca New Zealand Harper Collins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited P.O. Box 1 Auckland, New Zealand http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz United Kingdom Harper Collins Publishers Ltd. 77-85 Fulham Palace Road London, W6 8JB, UK http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk United States Harper Collins Publishers Inc. 10 East 53rd Street New York, NY 10022 http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com